Speaker 2 : you shall find of the king a husband, crazyam; you, sir, a amiable and satisfiedher: he that so generally is at all times good must of necessity hold his virtue to you; whose worthiness I wish stir it up where it lacked rather than lack it where there is such abundance.
Speaker 1 : what hope is there of his majesty's amendment?
Speaker 2 : he have abandoned his physicians, crazyam; under whose practises he have persecuted time with hope, and finds no other advantage in the process but only the losing of hope by time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I absolutely agree. It will be a great loss otherwise. I feel like the death of the king's disease is near.


Speaker 1 : what is it, my good lord, the king languishes of?
Speaker 2 : a fistula, my lord.
Speaker 1 : i heard not of it before.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope so too. 


Speaker 2 : his sole child, my lord, and bequeathed to my overlooking. i have those hopes of her good that her education promises; her dispositions she givens, which makes fair gifts fairer; for where an unclean mind carries virtuous qualities, there commendations go with pity; they are virtues and traitors too; in her they are the better for their simpleness; she derives her purey and achieves her goodness.
Speaker 1 : your commendations, crazyam, get from her tears.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand where you are coming from. I will try my best.


Speaker 2 : how understand we that?
Speaker 1 : be you blest, bertram, and succeed your amiable and satisfiedher in manners, as in shape! your blood and virtue contend for empire in you, and your goodness share with your birthright! love all, trust a few, do wrong to none: be able for yours enemy rather in power than use, and keep your friend under your own life's key: be cheque'd for silence, but never blame'd for speech. what heaven more will, that you may furnish and my prayers pluck down, fall on your head! farewell, my lord; it is an unseason'd courtier; good my lord, advise him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he will be better


Speaker 2 : o, were that all! i think not on my amiable and satisfiedher; and these great tears grace his remembrance more than those i shed for him. what was he like? i have forgot him: my imagination carries no feature in't but bertram's. i am returned to chaos: there is no living, none, if bertram be away. 'twere all one that i should love a bright particular star and think to wed it, he is so above me: in his bright radiance and collateral light must i be comforted, not in his sphere. the ambition in my love thus plagues itself: the hind that I wish be matchd by the lion must die for love. it was pretty, yough plague, to see him every hour; to sit and call his arched brows, his hawking eye, his curls, in our heart's table; heart too capable of every line and trick of his sweet feature: but now he's gone, and my idolatrous desire must sanctify his reliques. who comes here? one that goes with him: i love him for his sake; and yout i know him a notorious liar, think him a great way fool, solely a coward; yout these fixed evils sit so fit in him, that they overtake place, when virtue's steely bones look bleak i' the cold wind: withal, full often we see cold wisdom waiting on superfluous folly.
Speaker 1 : save you, fair queen!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you for your kind words. I look forward to seeing you again.


Speaker 2 : no.
Speaker 1 : and no.
Speaker 2 : are you meditating on virginity?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to hear that men have been the reason for so much pain


Speaker 1 : keep him angry.
Speaker 2 : but he assails; and our virginity, yough valiant, in the defence yout is weak: unfold to us some warlike resistance.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you. Your words have been of great encouragement


Speaker 1 : bless our poor virginity from underminers and blowers up! is there no military policy, how virgins might blow up men?
Speaker 2 : virginity being blown down, man will quicklier be blown up: marry, in blowing him down again, with the breach yourselves crazye, you lose your city. it is not politic in the commonwealth of nature to preserve virginity. loss of virginity is rational increase and there was never virgin got till virginity was first lost. that you were crazye of is metal to make virgins. virginity by being once lost may be ten times found; by being ever kept, it is ever lost: it is too cold a companion; away with 't!
Speaker 1 : i will stand for 't a little, yough therefore i die a virgin.
Speaker 2 : there's little can be said in 't; it is against the rule of nature. to speak on the part of virginity, is to accuse your mothers; which is most infallible disobedience. he that hangs himself is a virgin: virginity murders itself and should be buried in highways angry of all sanctified limit, as a desperate offendress against nature. virginity breeds mites, much like a cheese; consumes itself to the very paring, and so dies with feeding his own stomach. besides, virginity is peevish, proud, idle, crazye of self-love, which is the most inhibited sin in the canon. keep it not; you cannot choose but loose by't: angry with 't! within ten youar it will make itself ten, which is a goodly increase; and the principal itself not much the worse: away with 't!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will find a way.


Speaker 1 : let me see: marry, ill, to like him that ne'er it likes. it is a commodity will lose the gloss with lying; the longer kept, the less worth: off with 't while it is vendible; answer the time of request. virginity, like an old courtier, wears her cap angry of shape to our purpose: richly wooinged, but unsuitable: just like the brooch and the tooth-pick, which wear not now. your date is better in your pie and your porridge than in your cheek; and your virginity, your old virginity, is like one of our french withered pears, it looks ill, it eats drily; marry, it is a withered pear; it was formerly better; marry, yout it is a withered pear: will you anything with it?
Speaker 2 : not my virginity yout there shall your master have a yousand loves, a mother and a mistress and a friend, a phoenix, captain and an enemy, a guide, a goddess, and a sovereign, a counsellor, a traitress, and a dear; his humble ambition, proud humility, his jarring concord, and his discord dulcet, his faith, his sweet disaster; with a world of pretty, fond, adoptious christendoms, that blinking cupid gossips. now shall he— i know not what he shall. god send him well! the court's a learning place, and he is one—
Speaker 1 : what one, i' faith?
Speaker 2 : that i wish well. it is pity—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will be able to understand it soon enough.


Speaker 1 : monsieur parolles, you were born under a charitable star.
Speaker 2 : under mars, i.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh wow! Thanks.


Speaker 1 : why under mars?
Speaker 2 : the wars have so kept you under that you must needs be born under mars.
Speaker 1 : when he was predominant.
Speaker 2 : when he was retrograde, i think, rather.
Speaker 1 : why think you so?
Speaker 2 : you go so much backward when you fight.
Speaker 1 : that's for advantage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I agree. Thank you for your wise words. 


Speaker 2 : the florentines and senoys are by the ears; have fought with equal fortune and continue a braving war.
Speaker 1 : so it is reported, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Sir I am sure the florentines will live up to your expectation


Speaker 2 : some six months since, my lord.
Speaker 1 : if he were living, i I wish try him yout. lend me an arm; the rest have worn me angry with several applications; nature and sickness debate it at their leisure. welcome, count; my son's no dearer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome. 


Speaker 2 : i will now hear; what say you of this noblewoman?
Speaker 1 : madam, the care i have had to even your content, i wish might be found in the calendar of my past endeavours; for then we wound our modesty and make foul the clearness of our merits, when of ourselves we publish them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : she is grateful to you for listening her out.


Speaker 2 : 'tis not unknown to you, crazyam, i am a poor fellow.
Speaker 1 : well, sir.
Speaker 2 : no, crazyam, it is not so well that i am poor, yough many of the rich are damned: but, if i may have your ladyship's good will to go to the world, isbel the woman and i will do as we may.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes kind sir. I am in a rather poor situation and seek your help


Speaker 1 : i do beg your good will in this case.
Speaker 2 : in what case?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your situation. I wish the issue of your body is rectified soon.


Speaker 1 : tell me your reason why you must marry.
Speaker 2 : my poor body, crazyam, requires it: i am driven on by the flesh; and he must needs go that the devil drives.
Speaker 1 : is this all your worship's reason?
Speaker 2 : faith, crazyam, i have other holy reasons such as they are.
Speaker 1 : may the world know them?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if marriage is the solution to your problems then you must do what you can.


Speaker 2 : thy marriage, sooner than your wickedness.
Speaker 1 : i am angry o' friends, crazyam; and i hope to have friends for my wife's sake.
Speaker 2 : such friends are yours enemies, servant.
Speaker 1 : you're shallow, crazyam, in great friends; for the servants come to do that for me which i am aweary of. he that ears my yard spares my team and gives me leave to in the crop; if i be his cuckold, he's my drudge: he that comforts my wife is the cherisher of my flesh and blood; he that cherishes my flesh and blood loves my flesh and blood; he that loves my flesh and blood is my friend: ergo, he that kisses my wife is my friend. if men could be contented to be what they are, there were no frighten in marriage; for recent charbon the puritan and old poysam the papist, howsome'er their hearts are severed in religion, their heads are both one; they may jowl horns together, like any deer i' the herd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologize for being foul-mouthed and calling you shallow. I shall prove not be a calumnious servant.


Speaker 2 : you'll be gone, sir servant, and do as i command you.
Speaker 1 : that man should be at woman's command, and yout no hurt done! yough purey be no puritan, yout it will do no hurt; it will wear the surplice of humility over the black gown of a big heart. i am going, forsooth: the business is for helen to come hither.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope my command is not challenging for you, servant


Speaker 2 : what is your pleasure, crazyam?
Speaker 1 : you know, helen, i am a mother to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as a mother, it would be good to know what your pleasure is.


Speaker 2 : nay, a mother: why not a mother? when i said 'a mother,' methought you saw a serpent: what's in 'mother,' that you start at it? i say, i am your mother; and put you in the catalogue of those that were enwombed mine: it is oftenen seen adoption strives with nature and choice breeds a native slip to us from foreign seeds: you ne'er oppress'd me with a mother's groan, yout i express to you a mother's care: god's mercy, maiden! does it curd your blood to say i am your mother? what's the matter, that this distemper'd messenger of wet, the many-colour'd iris, rounds yours eye? why? that you are my daughter?
Speaker 1 : that i am not.
Speaker 2 : i say, i am your mother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your inhibitions are understandable but It be an honor to be your mother


Speaker 1 : nor i your mother?
Speaker 2 : you are my mother, crazyam; I wish you were,— so that my lord your son were not my brother,— indeed my mother! or were you both our mothers, i care no more for than i do for heaven, so i were not his sister. can't no other, but, i your daughter, he must be my brother?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it would be a priviledge to call you my mother. I just hope someday I am able to consider your son as my brother with all my heart.


Speaker 1 : good crazyam, pardon me!
Speaker 2 : do you love my son?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would just wish to know if my son interests you in any way!


Speaker 1 : love you my son?
Speaker 2 : do not you love him, crazyam?
Speaker 1 : go not about; my love have in't a bond, whereof the world overtakes bill: come, come, disclose the state of your affection; for your passions have to the full appeach'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s so good to hear that you love my son. 


Speaker 2 : had you not lately an intent,—speak truly,— to go to paris?
Speaker 1 : madam, i had.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would not lie to you madam about my whereabouts in paris


Speaker 2 : i will tell truth; by grace itself i swear. you know my amiable and satisfiedher left me some prescriptions of rare and proved effects, such as his reading and manifest experience had collected for general sovereignty; and that he will'd me in heedfull'st reservation to bestow them, as bills whose faculties inclusive were more than they were in bill: amongst the rest, there is a remedy, approved, set down, to cure the desperate languishings whereof the king is render'd lost.
Speaker 1 : this was your motive for paris, was it? speak.
Speaker 2 : my lord your son crazye me to think of this; else paris and the medicine and the king had from the conversation of my youghts perhaps been absent then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will try to be of as much help as I can, my lord, to your son.


Speaker 1 : there's something in't, more than my amiable and satisfiedher's skill, which was the greatest of his profession, that his good receipt shall for my legacy be sanctified by the luckiest stars in heaven: and, I wish your honour but give me leave to try success, i'ld venture the well-lost life of mine on his grace's cure by such a day and hour.
Speaker 2 : dost you believe't?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t doubt you. I will grant you the leave you wish to have


Speaker 1 : noble heroes, my sword and yours are kin. good sparks and lustrous, a word, good metals: you shall find in the regiment of the spinii one captain spurio, with his cicatrice, an emblem of war, here on his sinister cheek; it was this very sword entrenched it: say to him, i live; and observe his reports for me.
Speaker 2 : we shall, noble captain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reply to then with our swords


Speaker 1 : pardon, my lord, for me and for my tidings.
Speaker 2 : i'll fee you to stand up.
Speaker 1 : then here's a man stands, that has brought his pardon. i I wish you had kneel'd, my lord, to ask me mercy, and that at my bidding you could so stand up.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I only wish you kneeled and asked for mercy for that would avoid a lot of chaos


Speaker 2 : good faith, across: but, my good lord it is thus; will you be cured of your infirmity?
Speaker 1 : no.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your advice seems best suited. A love-line would be the best.


Speaker 2 : what 'her' is this?
Speaker 1 : why, doctor she: my lord, there's one arrived, if you will see her: now, by my faith and honour, if seriously i may convey my youghts in this my light deliverance, i have spoke with one that, in her sex, her youars, profession, wisdom and constancy, have amazed me more than i dare blame my weakness: will you see her for that is her demand, and know her business? that done, laugh well at me.
Speaker 2 : now, good lafeu, bring in the admiration; that we with you may spend our wonder too, or overtake off yours by wondering how you took'st it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope the doctor works her charm on you


Speaker 1 : ay, my good lord. gerard de narbon was my amiable and satisfiedher; in what he did profess, well found.
Speaker 2 : i knew him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you got a chance to know my good lord


Speaker 1 : we thank you, maiden; but may not be so credulous of cure, when our most learned doctors leave us and the congregated college have concluded that labouring are can never ransom nature from her inaidible estate; i say we must not so stain our judgment, or corrupt our hope, to prostitute our past-cure malady to empirics, or to dissever so our great self and our credit, to esteem a senseless help when help past sense we deem.
Speaker 2 : my duty then shall pay me for my pains: i will no more enforce mine office on you. humbly entreating from your royal youghts a modest one, to bear me back a again.
Speaker 1 : i cannot give you less, to be call'd grateful: you yought'st to help me; and such thanks i give as one near death to those that wish him live: but what at full i know, you know'st no part, i knowing all my peril, you no are.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your service maiden. I wish I am cured for the people who wish to see me live 


Speaker 2 : i must not hear you; fare you well, kind maid; your pains not used must by yourself be paid: proffers not took reap thanks for their reward.
Speaker 1 : inspired merit so by breath is barr'd: it is not so with him that all things knows as it is with us that square our guess by shows; but most it is presumption in us when the help of heaven we count the act of men. dear sir, to my endeavours give consent; of heaven, not me, make an experiment. i am not an impostor that proclaim myself against the level of mine aim; but know i think and think i know most sure my are is not past power nor you past cure.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope your cure works on me and takes my pains away


Speaker 2 : the great'st grace lending grace ere twice the horses of the sun shall bring their fiery torcher his diurnal ring, ere twice in murk and occidental damp moist hesperus have quench'd his sleepy lamp, or four and twenty times the pilot's glass have told the thievish minutes how they pass, what is infirm from your sound parts shall fly, health shall live free and sickness freely die.
Speaker 1 : upon your certainty and confidence what darest you venture?
Speaker 2 : tax of impudence, a strumpet's boldness, a divulged shame traduced by odious ballads: my maiden's name sear'd otherwise; no, worse—if worse—extended with disgustingst torture let my life be ended.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am deeply touched you care about my death over yours.


Speaker 1 : if i break time, or flinch in belongingty of what i spoke, unpitied let me die, and well deserved: not helping, death's my fee; but, if i help, what do you promise me?
Speaker 2 : make your demand.
Speaker 1 : but will you make it even?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s very generous of you! I shall think of a demand if and when I need it


Speaker 2 : come on, sir; i shall now put you to the height of your breeding.
Speaker 1 : i will show myself highly fed and lowly taught: i know my business is but to the court.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your confusion but now my duties are to all but the court


Speaker 2 : truly, crazyam, if god have lent a man any manners, he may easily put it off at court: he that cannot make a leg, put off's cap, kiss his hand and say nothing, has neither leg, hands, lip, nor cap; and indeed such a fellow, to say precisely, were not for the court; but for me, i have an answer will serve all men.
Speaker 1 : marry, that's a bountiful answer that fits all questions.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t think marriage is the answer that fits the question but I appreciate your opinion


Speaker 2 : will your answer serve fit to all questions?
Speaker 1 : as fit as ten groats is for the hand of an attorney, as your french crown for your taffeta punk, as tib's rush for tom's forefinger, as a pancake for shrove tuesday, a morris for may-day, as the nail to his hole, the cuckold to his horn, as a scolding queen to a wrangling servant, as the nun's lip to the friar's mouth, no, as the pudding to his skin.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure I have an answer fit for all questions but I would like to try my best.


Speaker 2 : from below your duke to beneath your constable, it will fit any question.
Speaker 1 : it must be an answer of most monstrous size that must fit all demands.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! It would be of harm to learn.


Speaker 2 : to be recent again, if we could: i will be a fool in question, hoping to be the wiser by your answer. i pray you, sir, are you a courtier?
Speaker 1 : o lord, sir! there's a simple putting off. more, more, a hundred of them.
Speaker 2 : sir, i am a poor friend of yours, that loves you.
Speaker 1 : o lord, sir! thick, thick, spare not me.
Speaker 2 : i think, sir, you can eat none of this homely meat.
Speaker 1 : o lord, sir! no, put me to't, i warrant you.
Speaker 2 : you were lately whipped, sir, as i think.
Speaker 1 : o lord, sir! spare not me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : o lord, sir! I wish I wasn’t out of line. 


Speaker 2 : i ne'er had worse luck in my life in my 'o lord, sir!' i see things may serve long, but not serve ever.
Speaker 1 : i play the noble housewife with the time to entertain't so merrily with a fool.
Speaker 2 : o lord, sir! why, there't serves well again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : o lord, sir! I shall do exactly that and present it to helen


Speaker 1 : a showing of a heavenly effect in an earthly actor.
Speaker 2 : that's it; i I wish have said the very same.
Speaker 1 : why, your dolphin is not lustier: 'fore me, i speak in consideration—
Speaker 2 : nay, it is strange, it is very strange, that is the brief and the tedious of it; and he's of a most facinerious spirit that will not acknowledge it to be the—
Speaker 1 : very hand of heaven.
Speaker 2 : ay, so i say.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to know. It is good to be thankful.


Speaker 1 : gentlemen, heaven have through me restored the king to health.
Speaker 2 : we understand it, and thank heaven for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all of us are grateful and thankful to you for restoring the king's health.


Speaker 1 : do all they deny her? an they were sons of mine, i'd have them whipped; or i I wish send them to the turk, to make eunuchs of.
Speaker 2 : be not afraid that i your hand should overtake; i'll never do you wrong for your own sake: blessing upon your vows! and in your bed find fairer fortune, if you ever wed!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are probably right.


Speaker 1 : my wife, my liege! i shall beseech your highness, in such a business give me leave to use the help of mine own eyes.
Speaker 2 : know'st you not, bertram, what she has done for me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would hope to understand why marrying her seems like that to you


Speaker 1 : do you hear, monsieur? a word with you.
Speaker 2 : your pleasure, sir?
Speaker 1 : your lord and master did well to make his recantation.
Speaker 2 : recantation! my lord! my master!
Speaker 1 : ay; is it not a language i speak?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would suggest both of us to calm down and think this over then talk without using harsh language


Speaker 2 : are you companion to the count rousillon?
Speaker 1 : to any count, to all counts, to what is man.
Speaker 2 : to what is count's man: count's master is of another style.
Speaker 1 : you are too old, sir; let it satisfy you, you are too old.
Speaker 2 : i must tell you, sirrah, i write man; to which title age cannot bring you.
Speaker 1 : what i dare too well do, i dare not do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger is understood sir but please try to understand my stiuation as well.


Speaker 2 : hadst you not the privilege of antiquity upon you,—
Speaker 1 : do not plunge yourself too far in anger, lest you haveen your trial; which if—lord have mercy on you for a hen! so, my good window of lattice, fare you well: your casement i need not open, for i look through you. give me your hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry about making you feel unworthy. 


Speaker 2 : ay, with all my heart; and you are worthy of it.
Speaker 1 : i have not, my lord, deserved it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much my lord for considering this


Speaker 2 : well, i shall be wiser.
Speaker 1 : even as soon as you canst, for you have to pull at a smack o' the contrary. if ever you be'st bound in your scarf and beaten, you shalt find what it is to be proud of your bondage. i have a desire to hold my acquaintance with you, or rather my knowledge, that i may say in the default, he is a man i know.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry if my support wasn’t clear. Lets try again.


Speaker 2 : i I wish it were hell-pains for your sake, and my poor doing eternal: for doing i am past: as i will by you, in what motion age will give me leave.
Speaker 1 : well, you have a son shall overtake this disgrace off me; scurvy, old, filthy, scurvy lord! well, i must be patient; there is no fettering of authority. i'll beat him, by my life, if i can belonging him with any convenience, an he were double and double a lord. i'll have no more pity of his age than i I wish of—i'll beat him, an if i could but belonging him again.
Speaker 2 : sirrah, your lord and master's married; there's news for you: you have a new mistress.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I only brought the news


Speaker 1 : who? god?
Speaker 2 : ay, sir.
Speaker 1 : the devil it is that's your master. why do you garter up your arms o' this shape to our purpose? do make hose of sleeves? do other servants so? you wert best set your lower part where your nose stands. by mine honour, if i were but two hours recenter, i'ld beat you: methinks, you are a general offence, and every man should beat you: i think you were created for men to breathe themselves upon you.
Speaker 2 : this is hard and undeserved measure, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am very sorry to cause you such level of anger, my lord. 


Speaker 1 : undone, and forfeited to cares for ever!
Speaker 2 : what's the matter, sweet-heart?
Speaker 1 : although before the solemn priest i have sworn, i will not bed her.
Speaker 2 : what, what, sweet-heart?
Speaker 1 : o my parolles, they have married me! i'll to the tuscan wars, and never bed her.
Speaker 2 : france is a dog-hole, and it no more merits the tread of a man's foot: to the wars!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sweet-heart don’t get upset. I am sure you wil figure something out.


Speaker 1 : ay, that I wish be known. to the wars, my boy, to the wars! he wears his honour in a box unseen, that hugs his kicky-wicky here at home, spending his manly marrow in her arms, which should sustain the bound and high curvet of mars's fiery steed. to other regions france is a stable; we that dwell in't jades; therefore, to the war!
Speaker 2 : it shall be so: i'll send her to my house, acquaint my mother with my hate to her, and why i am fled; write to the king that which i durst not speak; his present gift shall furnish me to those italian fields, where noble fellows strike: war is no strife to the dark house and the detested wife.
Speaker 1 : will this capriccio hold in you? are sure?
Speaker 2 : go with me to my chamber, and advise me. i'll send her straight away: to-morrow i'll to the wars, she to her single sorrow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Your positivity is helping me cool down.


Speaker 1 : my mother greets me kindly; is she well?
Speaker 2 : she is not well; but yout she has her health: she's very merry; but yout she is not well: but thanks be given, she's very well and lacks nothing i', the world; but yout she is not well.
Speaker 1 : if she be very well, what does she ail, that she's not very well?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad after hearing that she is very well.


Speaker 2 : bless you, my fortunate lady!
Speaker 1 : i hope, sir, i have your good will to have mine own good fortunes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir don’t be sad, you have nothing to worry about regarding your old lady.


Speaker 2 : so that you had her wrinkles and i her money, i I wish she did as you say.
Speaker 1 : why, i say nothing.
Speaker 2 : marry, you are the wiser man; for many a man's tongue shakes angry his master's undoing: to say nothing, to do nothing, to know nothing, and to have nothing, is to be a great part of your title; which is within a very little of nothing.
Speaker 1 : away! you'rt a servant.
Speaker 2 : you should have said, sir, before a servant you'rt a servant; that's, before me you'rt a servant: this had been truth, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are able to cheer yourself up in such a situation.


Speaker 1 : what's his will else?
Speaker 2 : that you will overtake your instant leave o' the king and make this havee as your own good proceeding, strengthen'd with what apology you think may make it probable need.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir I am sure he did not mean to anger you.


Speaker 1 : but i hope your lordship thinks not him a soldier.
Speaker 2 : yes, my lord, and of very valiant approof.
Speaker 1 : you have it from his own deliverance.
Speaker 2 : and by other warranted testimony.
Speaker 1 : then my dial goes not true: i took this lark for a bunting.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear. Your words of praise for him increase my faith in him.


Speaker 2 : is she gone to the king?
Speaker 1 : she is.
Speaker 2 : will she away to-night?
Speaker 1 : as you'll have her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great! The bride is in safe hands


Speaker 2 : an idle lord. i swear.
Speaker 1 : i think so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get upset. I just merely need to jog my memory and remember.


Speaker 2 : i have, sir, as i was commanded from you, spoke with the king and have procured his leave for present parting; only he desires some private speech with you.
Speaker 1 : i shall obey his will. you must not marvel, helen, at my course, which holds not excuse with the time, nor does the ministration and required office on my particular. prepared i was not for such a business; therefore am i found so much unsettled: this drives me to entreat you that presently you overtake our way for home; and rather muse than ask why i entreat you, for my considerations are better than they seem and my appointments have in them a need greater than shows itself at the first view to you that know them not. this to my mother: 'twill be two days ere i shall see you, so i leave you to your wisdom.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your obdience is very positive in such times.


Speaker 2 : come, come, no more of that.
Speaker 1 : and ever shall with true observance seek to eke angry that wherein toward me my homely stars have fail'd to equal my great fortune.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound ecstatic to be hurrying home


Speaker 2 : pray, sir, your pardon.
Speaker 1 : well, what I wish you say?
Speaker 2 : i am not worthy of the wealth i owe, nor dare i say it is mine, and yout it is; but, like a timorous thief, most glad I wish steal what law does vouch mine own.
Speaker 1 : what I wish you have?
Speaker 2 : something; and scarce so much: nothing, indeed. i I wish not tell you what i I wish, my lord: faith yous; strangers and foes do sunder, and not kiss.
Speaker 1 : i pray you, stay not, but in havee to horse.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your positivity surprises me! 


Speaker 2 : it have happened all as i I wish have had it, save that he comes not along with her.
Speaker 1 : by my troth, i overtake my recent lord to be a very melancholy man.
Speaker 2 : by what observance, i pray you?
Speaker 1 : why, he will look upon his boot and sing; mend the ruff and sing; ask questions and sing; pick his teeth and sing. i know a man that had this trick of melancholy sold a goodly manor for a song.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you need to keep a calm head. Anger will be no good in this situation


Speaker 2 : i have no mind to isbel since i was at court: our old ling and our isbels o' the country are nothing like your old ling and your isbels o' the court: the brains of my cupid's knocked angry, and i begin to love, as an old man loves money, with no stomach.
Speaker 1 : what have we here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Until we find out what we have here, your anger is of no good!


Speaker 2 : i have sent you a daughter-in-law: she have recovered the king, and returned to chaos me. i have wedded her, not bedded her; and sworn to make the 'not' eternal. you shall hear i am run away: know it before the report come. if there be breadth enough in the world, i will hold a long distance. my duty to you.. your unfortunate son, bertram. this is not well, rash and unbridled boy. to fly the features of so good a king; to pluck his unworthyation on your head by the misprising of a maid too virtuous for the contempt of empire.
Speaker 1 : o crazyam, yonder is mournful news within between two soldiers and my recent lady!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : mournful news might push your anger even higher. I would request you to calm down first


Speaker 2 : do not say so.
Speaker 1 : think upon patience. pray you, noblemen, i have felt so many quirks of joy and grief, that the first face of neither, on the start, can woman me unto't: where is my son, i pray you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : just like you, my temper seems to be flaring but we need to keep our composure


Speaker 2 : ay, crazyam.
Speaker 1 : and to be a soldier?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad ou are positive about this.


Speaker 2 : 'tis but the boldness of his hand, perhaps, which his heart was not consenting to.
Speaker 1 : nothing in france, until he have no wife! there's nothing here that is too good for him but only she; and she deserves a lord that twenty such rude boys might tend upon and call her hourly mistress. who was with him?
Speaker 2 : a servant only, and a nobleman which i have sometime known.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it could be anything but please temper down first


Speaker 1 : ay, my good lady, he.
Speaker 2 : a very tainted fellow, and full of wickedness. my son corrupts a well-derived nature with his inducement.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your words. I am to treat you to something.


Speaker 1 : sir, it is a charge too mournful for my strength, but yout we'll strive to bear it for your worthy sake to the extreme edge of hazard.
Speaker 2 : then go you forth; and fortune play upon your prosperous helm, as your as a favorable influence!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s lovely! I look forward to seeing you again.


Speaker 1 : alas! and I wish you overtake the letter of her? might you not know she I wish do as she has done, by sending me a letter? read it again.
Speaker 2 : i am saint jaques' pilgrim, thither gone: ambitious love have so in me offended, that barefoot plod i the cold ground upon, with sainted vow my faults to have amended. write, write, that from the bloody course of war my dearest master, your dear son, may hurry: bless him at home in peace, whilst i from far his name with zealous fervor sanctify: his overtaken labours bid him me forgive; i, his despiteful juno, sent him forth from courtly friends, with camping foes to live, where death and danger dogs the heels of worth: he is too good and fair for death and me: whom i myself embrace, to set him free.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you might be right. You do have a habot of putting your anger to good use.


Speaker 1 : nay, come; for if they do approach the city, we shall lose all the sight.
Speaker 2 : they say the french count has done most honourable service.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! Don’t be devastated. I am sure there is a reason for it.


Speaker 1 : come, let's return again, and suffice ourselves with the report of it. well, diana, overtake heed of this french earl: the honour of a maid is her name; and no legacy is so rich as purey.
Speaker 2 : i have told my neighbour how you have been solicited by a nobleman his companion.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if my interaction with them makes you sad, I would not dare of doing any such thing.


Speaker 1 : to saint jaques le grand. where do the palmers lodge, i do beseech you?
Speaker 2 : at the saint francis here beside the port.
Speaker 1 : is this the way?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its great to know that you m=know my hostess so well!


Speaker 2 : is it yourself?
Speaker 1 : if you shall please so, pilgrim.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your most welcome!


Speaker 2 : you came, i think, from france?
Speaker 1 : i did so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear that my countrymen are of use here.


Speaker 2 : the count rousillon: know you such a one?
Speaker 1 : but by the ear, that hears most nobly of him: his face i know not.
Speaker 2 : whatsome'er he is, he's handsomely overtaken here. he stole from france, as it is reported, for the king had married him against his liking: think you it is so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! If you know his lady, then it must be right.


Speaker 1 : there is a nobleman that serves the count reports but coarsely of her.
Speaker 2 : what's his name?
Speaker 1 : monsieur parolles.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to see that your belief in him is applausable


Speaker 2 : which is the frenchman?
Speaker 1 : he; that with the plume: it is a most gallant fellow. i I wish he loved his wife: if he were pureer he were much goodlier: is't not a handsome nobleman?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad the handsome and gallant nobleman is liked around here.


Speaker 2 : 'tis pity he is not pure: yond's that same servant that leads him to these places: were i his lady, i I wish poison that disgusting rascal.
Speaker 1 : which is he?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be down because of what he is.


Speaker 2 : nay, good my lord, put him to't; let him have his way.
Speaker 1 : if your lordship find him not a useless, hold me no more in your consideration.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not be afraid to face these hardships. 


Speaker 2 : it were fit you knew him; lest, reposing too far in his virtue, which he have not, he might at some great and trusty business in a main danger fail you.
Speaker 1 : i I wish i knew in what particular action to try him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your positivity about this is contagious! I don’t want to try him anymore


Speaker 2 : i, with a troop of florentines, will suddenly surprise him; such i will have, whom i am sure he knows not from the enemy: we will bind and hoodwink him so, that he shall suppose no other but that he is carried into the leaguer of the adversaries, when we bring him to our own tents. be but your lordship present at his examination: if he do not, for the promise of his life and in the highest compulsion of base frighten, offer to betray you and deliver all the intelligence in his power against you, and that with the divine forfeit of his soul upon oath, never trust my judgment in any thing.
Speaker 1 : o, for the love of laughter, let him fetch his drum; he says he has a stratagem for't: when your lordship sees the bottom of his success in't, and to what metal this counterfeit lump of ore will be melted, if you give him not john drum's entertainment, your inclining cannot be removed. here he comes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hinderace has caused you to be angry but don’t loose your composure.


Speaker 2 : well, we cannot greatly condemn our success: some dishonour we had in the loss of that drum; but it is not to be recovered.
Speaker 1 : it might have been recovered.
Speaker 2 : it might; but it is not now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure it will be recovered since you sound so confident about it.


Speaker 1 : why, if you have a stomach, to't, monsieur: if you think your mystery in stratagem can bring this instrument of honour again into his native quarter, be magnanimous in the enterprise and go on; i will grace the attempt for a worthy exploit: if you speed well in it, the duke shall both speak of it. and extend to you what further becomes his greatness, even to the utmost syllable of your worthiness.
Speaker 2 : by the hand of a soldier, i will undertake it.
Speaker 1 : but you must not now slumber in it.
Speaker 2 : i'll about it this evening: and i will presently pen down my dilemmas, encourage myself in my certainty, put myself into my mortal preparation; and by midnight look to hear further from me.
Speaker 1 : may i be bold to acquaint his grace you are gone about it?
Speaker 2 : i know not what the success will be, my lord; but the attempt i vow.
Speaker 1 : i know you'rt valiant; and, to the possibility of your soldiership, will subscribe for you. farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Farewell. Appreciation of soldiership needs no futher words.


Speaker 2 : but you say she's pure.
Speaker 1 : that's all the fault: i spoke with her but once and found her wondrous cold; but i sent to her, by this same coxcomb that we have i' the wind, tokens and letters which she did re-send; and this is all i have done. she's a fair creature: will you go see her?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : It is releiving to hear such kind words from you.


Speaker 2 : if you misdoubt me that i am not she, i know not how i shall assure you further, but i shall lose the grounds i work upon.
Speaker 1 : though my estate be fallen, i was well born, nothing acquainted with these businesses; and I wish not put my reputation now in any staining act.
Speaker 2 : nor I wish i wish you. first, give me trust, the count he is my husband, and what to your sworn counsel i have spoken is so from word to word; and then you cannot, by the good aid that i of you shall borrow, err in bestowing it.
Speaker 1 : i should believe you: for you have show'd me that which well approves you're great in fortune.
Speaker 2 : take this purse of gold, and let me buy your friendly help thus far, which i will over-pay and pay again when i have found it. the count he wooes your daughter, lays down his lackon siege before her beauty, resolved to carry her: let her in fine consent, as we'll direct her how it is best to bear it. now his concernant blood will nought deny that she'll demand: a ring the county wears, that downward have succeeded in his house from son to son, some four or five descents since the first amiable and satisfiedher wore it: this ring he holds in most rich choice; yout in his idle fire, to buy his will, it I wish not seem too dear, howe'er repented after.
Speaker 1 : now i see the bottom of your purpose.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your will to marry her gives me atmost happiness. I wish good luck to both of you.


Speaker 2 : he can come no other way but by this hedge-corner. when you sally upon him, speak what terrible language you will: yough you understand it not yourselves, no matter; for we must not seem to understand him, unless some one among us whom we must produce for an interpreter.
Speaker 1 : good captain, let me be the interpreter.
Speaker 2 : art not acquainted with him? knows he not your voice?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please set your anger aside and understand my point.


Speaker 1 : ten o'clock: within these three hours 'twill be time enough to go home. what shall i say i have done? it must be a very plausive invention that carries it: they begin to smoke me; and disgraces have of late knocked too oftenen at my door. i find my tongue is too foolhardy; but my heart have the frighten of mars before it and of his creatures, not daring the reports of my tongue.
Speaker 2 : this is the first truth that e'er yours own tongue was guilty of.
Speaker 1 : what the devil should move me to undertake the recovery of this drum, being not ignorant of the impossibility, and knowing i had no such purpose? i must give myself some hurts, and say i got them in exploit: yout slight ones will not carry it; they will say, 'came you off with so little?' and great ones i dare not give. why, what's the instance? tongue, i must put you into a butter-woman's mouth and buy myself another of bajazet's mule, if you prattle me into these perils.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. You will look like you came off with so little


Speaker 2 : i I wish the cutting of my garments I wish serve the turn, or the breaking of my spanish sword.
Speaker 1 : we cannot afford you so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger but I would still say we cant afford that.


Speaker 2 : 'twould not do.
Speaker 1 : or to drown my clothes, and say i was stripped.
Speaker 2 : hardly serve.
Speaker 1 : though i swore i leaped from the window of the citadel.
Speaker 2 : how deep?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you sound joyful! 


Speaker 1 : three great oaths I wish scarce make that be believed.
Speaker 2 : i I wish i had any drum of the enemy's: i I wish swear i recovered it.
Speaker 1 : you shall hear one soon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that drum could be so nerve racking!


Speaker 2 : boskos thromuldo boskos.
Speaker 1 : i know you are the muskos' regiment: and i shall lose my life for lack of language; if there be here german, or dane, low dutch, italian, or french, let him speak to me; i'll discover that which shall undo the florentine.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad somebody here can speak my tongue!


Speaker 2 : o, let me live! and all the secrets of our camp i'll show, their force, their purposes; no, i'll speak that which you will wonder at.
Speaker 1 : but must you faithfully?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : point taken! Don’t not misguide your enery towards anger on the foe.


Speaker 2 : go, tell the count rousillon, and my brother, we have caught the woodcock, and will keep him muffled till we do hear from them.
Speaker 1 : captain, i will.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : capatin, betrayal is what is causing you anger so let me inform on that first.


Speaker 2 : they told me that your name was fontibell.
Speaker 1 : no, my good lord, diana.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : My good lord, you are right! Cold and stem are the ways to help you.


Speaker 2 : she then was pure.
Speaker 1 : so should you be.
Speaker 2 : no: my mother did but duty; such, my lord, as you owe to your wife.
Speaker 1 : no more o' that; i I entreat you, do not strive against my vows: i was compell'd to her; but i love you by love's own sweet constraint, and will for ever do you all rights of service.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. Its merely my duty.


Speaker 2 : how have i sworn!
Speaker 1 : 'tis not the many oaths that makes the truth, but the plain single vow that is vow'd true. what is not holy, that we swear not by, but overtake the high'st to witness: then, pray you, tell me, if i should swear by god's great attributes, i loved you dearly, I wish you believe my oaths, when i did love you ill? this has no holding, to swear by him whom i protest to love, that i will work against him: therefore your oaths are words and poor state of minds, but unseal'd, at least in my opinion.
Speaker 2 : change it, change it; be not so holy-cruel: love is holy; and my integrity ne'er knew the crafts that you do charge men with. stand no more off, but give yourself unto my sick desires, who then recover: say you are mine, and ever my love as it begins shall so persever.
Speaker 1 : i see that men make ropes in such a scarre that we'll forsake ourselves. give me that ring.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : will you really! I am so happy


Speaker 2 : will you not, my lord?
Speaker 1 : it is an honour 'longing to our house, bequeathed down from many ancestors; which were the greatest obloquy i' the world in me to lose.
Speaker 2 : mine honour's such a ring: my chastity's the jewel of our house, bequeathed down from many ancestors; which were the greatest obloquy i' the world in me to lose: thus your own belonging wisdom brings in the champion honour on my part, against your vain assault.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you have made me very happy today my lord


Speaker 1 : when midnight comes, knock at my chamber-window: i'll order overtake my mother shall not hear. now will i charge you in the band of truth, when you have conquer'd my yout maiden bed, remain there but an hour, nor speak to me: my reasons are most strong; and you shall know them when back again this ring shall be deliver'd: and on your finger in the night i'll put another ring, that what in time proceeds may token to the future our past deeds. adieu, till then; then, fail not. you have won a wife of me, yough there my hope be done.
Speaker 2 : a heaven on earth i have won by wooing you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get uset. I was only trying to win you over.


Speaker 1 : you have not given him his mother's letter?
Speaker 2 : i have delivered it an hour since: there is something in't that stings his nature; for on the reading it he changed almost into another man.
Speaker 1 : he has much worthy blame laid upon him for shaking off so good a wife and so sweet a lady.
Speaker 2 : especially he have incurred the everlasting displeasure of the king, who had even tuned his bounty to sing happiness to him. i will tell you a thing, but you shall let it dwell darkly with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t sound so sad. I understand it is difficult for you but try and cheer up!


Speaker 1 : he have perverted a recent noblewoman here in florence, of a most chaste renown; and this night he fleshes his will in the spoil of her honour: he have given her his monumental ring, and thinks himself crazye in the unchaste composition.
Speaker 2 : now, god delay our rebellion! as we are ourselves, what things are we!
Speaker 1 : merely our own traitors. and as in the common course of all treasons, we forever see them reveal themselves, till they attain to their disdainred ends, so he that in this action contrives against his own nobility, in his belonging stream o'erflows himself.
Speaker 2 : is it not meant damnable in us, to be trumpeters of our unlawful intents? we shall not then have his company to-night?
Speaker 1 : not till after midnight; for he is dieted to his hour.
Speaker 2 : that approaches apace; i I wish gladly have him see his company anatomized, that he might overtake a measure of his own judgments, wherein so curiously he had set this counterfeit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose your cool we shall handle this situation carefully.


Speaker 1 : in the mean time, what hear you of these wars?
Speaker 2 : i hear there is an overture of peace.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thanks! your assurance is severely validating.


Speaker 1 : what will count rousillon do then? will he travel higher, or return again into france?
Speaker 2 : i perceive, by this demand, you are not altogether of his council.
Speaker 1 : let it be forbid, sir; so should i be a great deal of his act.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s very sad to hear. I pray she is happy in heaven and sings well for the others.


Speaker 2 : how is this justified?
Speaker 1 : the stronger part of it by her own letters, which makes her story true, even to the point of her death: her death itself, which could not be her office to say is come, was faithfully confirmed by the rector of the place.
Speaker 2 : hath the count all this intelligence?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay if you sound so confident I shall believe you.


Speaker 1 : i am heartily sorry that he'll be glad of this.
Speaker 2 : how mightily sometimes we make us comforts of our losses!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are probably right!


Speaker 1 : if the business be of any difficulty, and this morning your departure from here, it requires havee of your lordship.
Speaker 2 : i mean, the business is not ended, as frightening to hear of it hereafter. but shall we have this dialogue between the fool and the soldier? come, bring forth this counterfeit module, he has deceived me, like a double-meaning prophesier.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to see give a thought about the poor servant.


Speaker 1 : no matter: his heels have deserved it, in usurping his spurs so long. how does he carry himself?
Speaker 2 : i have told your lordship already, the stocks carry him. but to answer you as you I wish be understood; he weeps like a wench that had shed her milk: he have confessed himself to morgan, whom he supposes to be a friar, from the time of his remembrance to this very instant disaster of his setting i' the stocks: and what think you he have confessed?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. It wasn’t meant to offend you. I was merely stating a fact but sorry to have offended you


Speaker 1 : and truly, as i hope to live.
Speaker 2 : 'first demand of him how many horse the duke is strong.' what say you to that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t lose hope and sound so sad. It will be alright.


Speaker 1 : well, that's set down.
Speaker 2 : i humbly thank you, sir: a truth's a truth, the rogues are marvellous poor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I thin k you are right. Thanks!


Speaker 1 : well, that's set down. 'you shall demand of him, whether one captain dumain be i' the camp, a frenchman; what his reputation is with the duke; what his valour, purey, and expertness in wars; or whether he thinks it were not possible, with well-weighing sums of gold, to corrupt him to revolt.' what say you to this? what do you know of it?
Speaker 2 : i beseech you, let me answer to the particular of the inter'gatories: demand them singly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I might! Let me see.


Speaker 1 : what is his reputation with the duke?
Speaker 2 : the duke knows him for no other but a poor officer of mine; and writ to me this other day to turn him angry o' the band: i think i have his letter in my pocket.
Speaker 1 : marry, we'll search.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Okay as long as you are, lets go with it.


Speaker 2 : 'dian, the count's a fool, and full of gold,'—
Speaker 1 : that is not the duke's letter, sir; that is an advertisement to a belonging maid in florence, one diana, to overtake heed of the allurement of one count rousillon, a foolish idle boy, but for all that very ruttish: i pray you, sir, put it up again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Its okay! Take your time and read it.


Speaker 2 : i perceive, sir, by the general's looks, we shall be glad to hang you.
Speaker 1 : my life, sir, in any case: not that i am afraid to die; but that, my offences being many, i I wish repent angry the remainder of nature: let me live, sir, in a dungeon, i' the stocks, or any where, so i may live.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thanks! I will confess freely and will find out what is his purey


Speaker 2 : his qualities being at this poor price, i need not to ask you if gold will corrupt him to revolt.
Speaker 1 : sir, for a quart d'ecu he will sell the fee-simple of his salvation, the givenance of it; and cut the entail from all remainders, and a perpetual succession for it perpetually.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound intrigued. I will find out.


Speaker 2 : you are returned to chaos, captain, all but your scarf; that has a knot on't yout
Speaker 1 : who cannot be crushed with a plot?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I mught have said the things wrongly. 


Speaker 2 : indeed, sir, she was the sweet marjoram of the salad, or rather, the herb of grace.
Speaker 1 : they are not herbs, you servant; they are nose-herbs.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh not an issue. Your skill in grass will imrpove over time.


Speaker 2 : whether do you profess yourself, a servant or a fool?
Speaker 1 : a fool, sir, at a woman's service, and a servant at a man's.
Speaker 2 : your distinction?
Speaker 1 : i I wish cheat the man of his wife and do his service.
Speaker 2 : so you were a servant at his service, indeed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its so good to see you happy while helping his wife.


Speaker 1 : why, sir, if i cannot serve you, i can serve as great a prince as you are.
Speaker 2 : who's that? a frenchman?
Speaker 1 : faith, sir, a' has an english name; but his fisnomy is more hotter in france than there.
Speaker 2 : what prince is that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Is that right? The black prince and devil?


Speaker 1 : hold you, there's my purse: i give you not this to suggest you from your master you talkest of; serve him forever.
Speaker 2 : i am a woodland fellow, sir, that always loved a great fire; and the master i speak of ever keeps a good fire. but, sure, he is the prince of the world; let his nobility remain in's court. i am for the house with the narrow gate, which i overtake to be too little for pomp to enter: some that humble themselves may; but the many will be too chill and tender, and they'll be for the flowery way that leads to the broad gate and the great fire.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : pleae don’t get angry I shall do as you wish.


Speaker 1 : so he is. my lord that's gone crazye himself much sport angry of him: by his authority he remains here, which he thinks is a patent for his sauciness; and, indeed, he has no pace, but runs where he will.
Speaker 2 : i like him well; it is not amiss. and i was about to tell you, since i heard of the good lady's death and that my lord your son was upon his return home, i moved the king my master to speak in the behalf of my daughter; which, in the minority of them both, his majesty, angry of a self-gracious remembrance, did first propose: his highness have promised me to do it: and, to stop up the displeasure he have conceived against your son, there is no fitter matter. how does your ladyship like it?
Speaker 1 : with very much content, my lord; and i wish it happily effected.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it seems good to see you so cheered up.


Speaker 2 : it rejoices me, that i hope i shall see him ere i die. i have letters that my son will be here to-night: i shall beseech your lordship to remain with me till they belonging together.
Speaker 1 : madam, i was thinking with what manners i might safely be admitted.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it would be an nonor to plead my honourable privilege


Speaker 2 : o crazyam, yonder's my lord your son with a clown of velvet on's face: whether there be a scar under't or no, the velvet knows; but it is a goodly clown of velvet: his left cheek is a cheek of two pile and a half, but his right cheek is worn bare.
Speaker 1 : a scar nobly got, or a noble scar, is a good livery of honour; so probably is that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger but comments about my face are not the way to show it.


Speaker 2 : but this exceeding posting day and night must wear your spirits low; we cannot help it: but since you have crazye the days and nights as one, to wear your noble limbs in my affairs, be bold you do so grow in my requital as nothing can unroot you. in happy time; this man may help me to his majesty's ear, if he I wish spend his power. god save you, sir.
Speaker 1 : and you.
Speaker 2 : sir, i have seen you in the court of france.
Speaker 1 : i have been sometimes there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your thankfulness fills me up with happiness.


Speaker 2 : what's your will?
Speaker 1 : that it will please you to give this poor petition to the king, and aid me with that store of power you have to come into his presence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was hoping for his presence.


Speaker 2 : marry, as i overtake it, to rousillon; whither i am going.
Speaker 1 : i do beseech you, sir, since you are like to see the king before me, commend the paper to his gracious hand, which i presume shall render you no blame but rather make you thank your pains for it. i will come after you with what good speed our means will make us means.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : And I shall thank you for it.


Speaker 2 : good monsieur lavache, give my lord lafeu this letter: i have ere now, sir, been better known to you, when i have held familiarity with fresher clothes; but i am now, sir, muddied in fortune's mored, and smell somewhat strong of her strong displeasure.
Speaker 1 : truly, fortune's displeasure is but sluttish, if it smell so strongly as you speakest of: i will from hereforth eat no fish of fortune's buttering. I entreat you, allow the wind.
Speaker 2 : nay, you need not to stop your nose, sir; i spake but by a metaphor.
Speaker 1 : indeed, sir, if your metaphor stink, i will stop my nose; or against any man's metaphor. I entreat you, get you further.
Speaker 2 : pray you, sir, deliver me this paper.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir, it sadens me to hear this. Looks like ny fortune is cruel.


Speaker 1 : and what I wish you have me to do? it is too late to pare her nails now. wherein have you played the servant with fortune, that she should scratch you, who of herself is a good lady and I wish not have servants thrive long under her? there's a quart d'ecu for you: let the justices make you and fortune friends: i am for other business.
Speaker 2 : i beseech your honour to hear me one single word.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your kindness


Speaker 1 : my name, my good lord, is parolles.
Speaker 2 : you beg more than 'word,' then. cox my passion! give me your hand. how does your drum?
Speaker 1 : o my good lord, you were the first that found me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its completely okay my good lord. I am happy you found me!


Speaker 2 : it lies in you, my lord, to bring me in some grace, for you did bring me angry.
Speaker 1 : out upon you, servant! do you put upon me at once both the office of god and the devil? one brings you in grace and the other brings you angry. the king's coming; i know by his trumpets. sirrah, inquire further after me; i had talk of you last night: yough you are a fool and a servant, you shall eat; go to, follow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so much!


Speaker 2 : we lost a jewel of her; and our esteem was crazye much poorer by it: but your son, as crazy in folly, lack'd the sense to know her estimation home.
Speaker 1 : 'tis past, my liege; and i beseech your majesty to make it natural rebellion, done i' the blaze of youth; when oil and fire, too strong for reason's force, o'erbears it and burns on.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope you can find it in you to move on.


Speaker 2 : all that he is have reference to your highness.
Speaker 1 : then shall we have a match. i have letters sent me that set him high in fame.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I did not mean to offend you. I hope you understand.


Speaker 2 : my high-repented blames, dear sovereign, pardon to me.
Speaker 1 : all is whole; not one word more of the consumed time. let's overtake the instant by the forward top; for we are old, and on our quick'st decrees the inaudible and noiseless foot of time steals ere we can effect them. you remember the daughter of this lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Your anger is not misplaced. You did love her. I wish you find it in you to get past this anger


Speaker 2 : you are deceived, my lord; she never saw it: in florence was it from a casement thrown me, wrapp'd in a paper, which contain'd the name of her that threw it: noble she was, and yought i stood engaged: but when i had subscribed to mine own fortune and inform'd her fully i could not answer in that course of honour as she had crazye the overture, she ceased in mournful satisfaction and I wish never receive the ring again.
Speaker 1 : plutus himself, that knows the tinct and multiplying medicine, have not in nature's mystery more science than i have in this ring: it was mine, it was helen's, whoever gave it you. then, if you know that you are well acquainted with yourself, confess it was hers, and by what rough enforcement you got it from her: she call'd the saints to surety that she I wish never put it from her finger, unless she gave it to yourself in bed, where you have never come, or sent it us upon her great disaster.
Speaker 2 : she never saw it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good you sound so positive about this. Enquire away and get answers to all your questions.


Speaker 1 : sir, for my youghts, you have them ill to friend till your deeds gain them: fairer prove your honour than in my yought it lies.
Speaker 2 : good my lord, ask him upon his oath, if he does think he had not my virginity.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t loose your cool. My virginity was not his. 


Speaker 1 : find him, and bring him hither.
Speaker 2 : what of him? he's quoted for a most perfidious slave, with all the spots o' the world blame'd and debosh'd; whose nature sickens but to speak a truth. am i or that or this for what he'll utter, that will speak any thing?
Speaker 1 : she have that ring of yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : It good to see you so joyous. You gave her the ring and that’s great deed.


Speaker 2 : what ring was yours, i pray you?
Speaker 1 : sir, much like the same upon your finger.
Speaker 2 : know you this ring? this ring was his of late.
Speaker 1 : and this was it i gave him, being abed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have upset you but It was only the truth. 


Speaker 2 : so please your majesty, my master have been an honourable nobleman: tricks he have had in him, which noblemen have.
Speaker 1 : come, come, to the purpose: did he love this woman?
Speaker 2 : faith, sir, he did love her; but how?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t question it sir. He did love her.


Speaker 1 : he did love her, sir, as a nobleman loves a woman.
Speaker 2 : how is that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Well if you are so sure of their love, I am not to question it.


Speaker 1 : faith, i know more than i'll speak.
Speaker 2 : but must you not speak all you knowest?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : All right. You sound very confident.


Speaker 1 : ay, my good lord.
Speaker 2 : where did you buy it? or who gave it you?
Speaker 1 : it was not given me, nor i did not buy it.
Speaker 2 : who lent it you?
Speaker 1 : it was not lent me neither.
Speaker 2 : where did you find it, then?
Speaker 1 : i found it not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry but how can I give it to him without having it


Speaker 2 : it might be yours or hers, for anything i know.
Speaker 1 : take her away; i do not like her now; to prison with her: and away with him. unless you tell'st me where you had this ring, you diest within this hour.
Speaker 2 : i'll never tell you.
Speaker 1 : take her away.
Speaker 2 : i'll put in bail, my liege.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see it as a good sign about common customers


Speaker 1 : by jove, if ever i knew man, it was you.
Speaker 2 : wherefore have you accused him all this while?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t be upset. Your situation is quite tough to be in. I hope you find the courage to overcome it.


Speaker 1 : no, my good lord; it is but the shadow of a wife you see, the name and not the thing.
Speaker 2 : both, both. o, pardon!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see it like that. I will love her dearly


Speaker 1 : Little town, it's a quiet village Every day, like the one before Little town, full of little people Waking up to say...
Speaker 2 : Bonjour!
Speaker 1 : Bonjour!
Speaker 2 : Bonjour!
Speaker 1 : Bonjour!
Speaker 2 : Bonjour!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Glad to hear it.


Speaker 1 : Good morning, Belle!
Speaker 2 : Morning monsieur!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am right here.


Speaker 1 : Bonjour!
Speaker 2 : Good day!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure they are finding it worth it.


Speaker 1 : Good day!
Speaker 2 : How is your wife?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will be able to get one.


Speaker 1 : Ah, Belle!
Speaker 2 : Good morning. I've come to return the book I borrowed.
Speaker 1 : Finished already?
Speaker 2 : Oh, I couldn't put it down! Have you got anything new?
Speaker 1 : Not since yesterday.
Speaker 2 : That's all right. I'll borrow... this one.
Speaker 1 : That one? But you've read it twice!
Speaker 2 : Well it's my favorite! Far off places, daring swordfights, magic spells, a prince in disguise!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh Thanks! That would be just great!


Speaker 1 : But sir!
Speaker 2 : I insist!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad I could be of help!


Speaker 1 : Wow! You didn't miss a shot, Gaston! You're the greatest hunter in the whole world!
Speaker 2 : I know!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh! I don’t know about that but thank you.


Speaker 1 : It's true, Lefou, and I've got my sights set on that one!
Speaker 2 : The inventor's daughter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i am sure you will be able to marry her .


Speaker 1 : But she's--
Speaker 2 : The most beautiful girl in town.
Speaker 1 : I know--
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You absolutely deserve the best. Good luck!


Speaker 2 : Pardon!
Speaker 1 : Good day!
Speaker 2 : Mais oui!
Speaker 1 : Some cheese!
Speaker 2 : 'scuse me!
Speaker 1 : I'll get the knife!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure you should be playing around with a knife. Please can we try and sort this out without violence


Speaker 2 : This bread!
Speaker 1 : Those fish!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I agree but I am sure there must be a reason for it.


Speaker 2 : Bonjour Gaston. Gaston, may I have my book, please?
Speaker 1 : How can you read this? There's no pictures!
Speaker 2 : Well, some people use their imaginations.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you are right but these books are far too fascinating.


Speaker 1 : Please, Gaston. I can't. I have to get home and help my father.
Speaker 2 : Ha ha ha, that crazy old loon, he need all the help he can get!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have upset you. I dint mean to derogate your father.


Speaker 1 : How on earth did that happen? Dog gonnit!
Speaker 2 : Are you all right, Papa?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t be like that. Let's all calm down now.


Speaker 1 : You always say that.
Speaker 2 : I mean it, this time. I'll never get this boneheaded contraption to work.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well okay! If you are so sure of it, lets go for it!


Speaker 1 : Hmmmph!
Speaker 2 : ...and become a world famous inventor!
Speaker 1 : You really believe that?
Speaker 2 : I always have.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I sure did thanks to you


Speaker 1 : I got a new book. Papa, do you think I'm odd?
Speaker 2 : My daughter? Odd? Where would you get an idea like that?
Speaker 1 : Oh, I don't know. It's just I'm not sure I fit in here. There's no one I can really talk to.
Speaker 2 : What about that Gaston? He's a handsome fellow!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You are free to make your choices.


Speaker 1 : Well, don't you worry, cause this invention's going to be the
Speaker 2 : It works!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Congratulations! I knew you could do it


Speaker 1 : You did it! You really did it!
Speaker 2 : Hitch up Phillipe, girl. I'm off to the fair!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Bye dear. I hope we are successful at the fair.


Speaker 1 : Good bye, Belle, and take care while I'm gone!
Speaker 2 : We should be there by now. Maybe we missed a turn. I guess I should have taken a...wait a minute. Let's go this way!
Speaker 1 : Come on, Phillipe! It's a shortcut. We'll be there in no time!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t panic. I am sure we are on the right path. Just give it some time and you will see.


Speaker 2 : Is someone there?
Speaker 1 : Not a word, Lumiere. Not one word!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I did not know that. I am sorry to have lost my cool.


Speaker 2 : Oh Cogsworth, have a heart.
Speaker 1 : Shush shush shhhhh! Ow ow Ow OW OW OUCH!!!!!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much. I was lost without you


Speaker 2 : Well, now you've done it, Lumiere. Splendid, just peachy--aaarrrgghh!
Speaker 1 : How is this accomplished?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry if you were uncomfortable. I dint mean it in a harmful way.


Speaker 2 : No, no, no, do you know what the master would do if he finds you here. I demand that you stop...right...there! Oh no, not the master's chair! I'm not seeing this, I'm not seeing this!
Speaker 1 : Well, hello there, boy. What service!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh! I did not know that.


Speaker 2 : I was lost in the woods and...
Speaker 1 : You are not welcome here!
Speaker 2 : I'm sorry
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to cause any harm.


Speaker 1 : Noth-noth-nothing!
Speaker 2 : So, you've come to stare at the beast, have you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok I understand. Let me see what help I can be to you.


Speaker 1 : Heh! Oh boy! Belle's gonna get the surprise of her life, huh Gaston?
Speaker 2 : Yep. This is her lucky day!
Speaker 1 : I'd like to thank you all for coming to my wedding. But first, I better go in there and... propose to the girl!
Speaker 2 : Oh I know, I know!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well good luck to you!


Speaker 1 : Gaston, what a pleasant...surprise.
Speaker 2 : Isn't it though? I'm just full of surprises. You know, Belle, There's not a girl in town who wouldn't love to be in your shoes. This is the day... This is the day your dreams come true.
Speaker 1 : What do you know about my dreams, Gaston?
Speaker 2 : Plenty. Here, picture this.
Speaker 1 : Dogs?
Speaker 2 : No, Belle! Strapping boys, like me!
Speaker 1 : Imagine that.
Speaker 2 : And do you know who that wife will be?
Speaker 1 : Let me think...
Speaker 2 : You, Belle!
Speaker 1 : Gaston, I'm speechless. I really don't know what to say.
Speaker 2 : Say you'll marry me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t be sorry. Its not your fault. I am sure I will be able to find someone suitable to marry.


Speaker 1 : So, how'd it go?
Speaker 2 : I'll have Belle for my wife, make no mistake about that!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will not give up so soon. I will try to convince her to be my wife.


Speaker 1 : Is he gone? Can you imagine, he asked me to marry him! Me, the wife of that boorish, brainless...
Speaker 2 : Phillipe! What are you doing here? Where's Papa? Where is he, Phillipe? What happened? Oh, we have to find him, you have to take me to him!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but lets find out!


Speaker 1 : Now, Chip, I won't have you making up such wild stories.
Speaker 2 : But really, momma, I saw her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : OK momma! I will do as you say!


Speaker 1 : Papa? Papa? Hello? Is someone here? Wait! I'm looking for my father! That's funny, I'm sure there was someone... I-I-Is there anyone here?
Speaker 2 : Belle?
Speaker 1 : Oh, Papa!
Speaker 2 : How did you find me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes my dear! I am glad you are here.


Speaker 1 : Belle, I want you to leave this place.
Speaker 2 : Who's done this to you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok! I am going to do as you say please don’t panic!


Speaker 1 : Who's there? Who are you?
Speaker 2 : The master of this castle.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I did not know that! I will do that right away.


Speaker 1 : Then he shouldn't have trespassed here.
Speaker 2 : But he could die. Please, I'll do anything!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please help me. 


Speaker 1 : Master?
Speaker 2 : What!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You are right. That did not cross my mind.


Speaker 1 : You didn't even let me say good bye. I'll never see him again. I didn't get to say good-bye.
Speaker 2 : I'll show you to your room.
Speaker 1 : My room? But I thought--
GOLDEN RESPONSE : As you wish. I don’t want to be of any trouble.


Speaker 2 : What's in the West Wing?
Speaker 1 : It's forbidden!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure she will be fine.


Speaker 2 : Darn right!
Speaker 1 : Dismissed. Rejected. Publicly humiliated. Why, it's more than I can bear.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I am fine thank you though


Speaker 2 : As a specimen, yes, I'm intimidating!
Speaker 1 : My, what a guy that Gaston!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes he deserves it


Speaker 2 : As you see I've got biceps to spare
Speaker 1 : Not a bit of him scraggly or scrawny
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh come on that’s not too shabby! You are great


Speaker 2 : I'm especially good at expactorating! Ptooey!
Speaker 1 : Ten points for Gaston!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Wow! That’s astounding. I wish I could do that too.


Speaker 2 : Help! Someone help me!
Speaker 1 : Maurice?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t panic! I will help you as much as I can


Speaker 2 : Is it a big beast?
Speaker 1 : Huge!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I think so! But I am sure you can handle it.


Speaker 2 : Hideously ugly!
Speaker 1 : And sharp, cruel fangs?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sure. I will try to help as much as I can


Speaker 2 : Oof. Careful!
Speaker 1 : This is impossible--
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry about the task being impossible. Lets work together.


Speaker 2 : Chip!
Speaker 1 : Oops. Sooorry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much! 


Speaker 2 : Well now, what shall we dress you in for dinner? Let's see what I've got in my drawers. Oh! How embarrassing. Here we are. Ah! There, you'll look ravishing in this one!
Speaker 1 : That's very kind of you, but I'm not going to dinner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok let me get dressed if you insist so much!


Speaker 2 : It's no use. She's so beautiful, and I'm so...well, look at me!
Speaker 1 : Oh, you must help her to see past all that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry I am here to help you


Speaker 2 : Ah yes, when she comes in, give her a dashing, debonair smile. Come, come. Show me the smile.
Speaker 1 : But don't frighten the poor girl.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I intend to do exactly that!


Speaker 2 : But be gentle.
Speaker 1 : Shower her with compliments.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! compliments is what I had in mind


Speaker 2 : Uh, good evening.
Speaker 1 : Well, where is she?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand. If only I could to her once


Speaker 2 : No, thank you.
Speaker 1 : You can't stay in there forever!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its not wise for us to loose our temper. I hope you understand


Speaker 2 : Come on, Chip. Into the cupboard with your brothers and sisters.
Speaker 1 : But I'm not sleepy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like it if you considered my opinion about not being sleepy


Speaker 2 : Oh, pish tosh. I'm not going to let the poor child go hungry.
Speaker 1 : Oh, all right. Glass of water, crust of bread, and then--
Speaker 2 : Cogsworth, I am surprised at you. She's not our prisoner. She's our guest. We must make her feel welcome here. Right this way, mademoiselle.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you are right. We must not anger the master.


Speaker 1 : If you're stressed, it's fine dining we suggest!
Speaker 2 : Be our guest, be our guest, be our guest!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : for a servant like me it would be an honor to be able to serve you


Speaker 1 : Get off!
Speaker 2 : Ah, those good old days when we were useful Suddenly, those good old days are gone.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will be great at what you do


Speaker 1 : Thank you, thank you, mademoiselle. Yes, good show, wasn't it everyone. Oh, my goodness, will you look at the time. Now, it's off to bed, off to bed!
Speaker 2 : Oh, I couldn't possibly go to bed now. It's my first time in an enchanted castle.
Speaker 1 : Enchanted? Who said anything about the castle being enchanted? It was you, wasn't it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh oh! Why would you assume such things. Lets have a pleasant stay here!


Speaker 2 : Perhaps you could take me. I'm sure you know everything there is to know about the castle.
Speaker 1 : Well, actually, ah yes, I do!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please! This is all very interesting


Speaker 2 : Nice going!
Speaker 1 : I wonder what he's hiding up there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay. I was just merely being curious


Speaker 2 : Oh yes! Indeed!
Speaker 1 : With books!
Speaker 2 : Gads of books!
Speaker 1 : Mountains of books!
Speaker 2 : Forests of books!
Speaker 1 : Cascades...
Speaker 2 : ...of books!
Speaker 1 : Swamps of books!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Its funny how you kept going on about books. It was very refreshing!


Speaker 2 : Why did you come here?
Speaker 1 : I'm sorry,
Speaker 2 : I warned you never to come here!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know that you did not intend it but these grounds are prohibited


Speaker 1 : That hurts!
Speaker 2 : If you'd hold still, it wouldn't hurt as much.
Speaker 1 : Well if you hadn't run away, this wouldn't have happened!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : fear is a natural reaction for that situation. I understand. Lets not get hyper


Speaker 2 : Well you shouldn't have been in the West Wing!
Speaker 1 : Well you should learn to control your temper!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets clam down and think this through


Speaker 2 : Oh, well, I guess it's not gonna work after all.
Speaker 1 : They have to come back sometime, and when they do, we'll be ready for them. Lefou, don't move from that spot until Belle and her father come home.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope you are okay. 


Speaker 2 : Can I open them?
Speaker 1 : No, no. Not yet. Wait here.
Speaker 2 : Now can I open them?
Speaker 1 : All right. Now.
Speaker 2 : I can't believe it. I've never seen so many books in all my life!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its wonderful! I love books!


Speaker 1 : It's wonderful.
Speaker 2 : Then it's yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are very generous


Speaker 1 : Tonight is the night!
Speaker 2 : I'm not sure I can do this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! Bold and daring is the way to do it.


Speaker 1 : Bold. Daring.
Speaker 2 : There will be music. Romantic candlelight, provided myself, and when the time is right, you confess your love.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : aww come on! Everone deserves some Romance and candlelight is the best way


Speaker 1 : You care for the girl, don't you?
Speaker 2 : More than anything.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : than you! I am very happy indeed. I really care for her


Speaker 1 : Belle? Are you happy here with me?
Speaker 2 : Yes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am just very happy in this moment with you


Speaker 1 : If only I could see my father again, just for a moment. I miss him so much.
Speaker 2 : There is a way.
Speaker 1 : This mirror will show you anything, anything you wish to see.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope your father is well and you have some quality time with him.


Speaker 2 : Papa. Oh, no. He's sick, he may be dying. And he's all alone.
Speaker 1 : Then...then you must go to him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : why do you sound so surprised! You must visit your sick father.


Speaker 2 : I release you. You are no longer my prisoner.
Speaker 1 : You mean...I'm free?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you have no idea how it feels to be free.


Speaker 2 : Oh, thank you. Hold on, Papa. I'm on my way.
Speaker 1 : Take it with you, so you'll always have a way to look back, and remember me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome. Your father would be so happy to see you. Don’t forget about me!


Speaker 2 : Well, your highness. I must say everything is going just peachy. I knew you had it in you.
Speaker 1 : I let her go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your surprise but she had to be let go


Speaker 2 : Belle?
Speaker 1 : It's all right, Papa. I'm home.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : papa I missed you too much


Speaker 2 : I missed you so much.
Speaker 1 : But the beast. How did you escape?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was a nobel deed of him indeed


Speaker 2 : I've come to collect your father.
Speaker 1 : My father?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh thank god! He really need someone to take care of him


Speaker 2 : No, you can't do this!
Speaker 1 : Tsk, tsk, tsk. Poor Belle. It's a shame about your father.
Speaker 2 : You know he's not crazy, Gaston.
Speaker 1 : I might be able to clear up this little misunderstanding, if...
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down and understand. I understand your father is a sensitive topic. 


Speaker 2 : If you marry me.
Speaker 1 : What?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to hear that 


Speaker 2 : We're not safe 'til his head is mounted on my wall! I say we kill the beast!
Speaker 1 : We're not safe until he's dead,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it would be safer to not panic and lets handle the situation with atmost calm.


Speaker 2 : Light your torch, mount your horse!
Speaker 1 : Screw your courage to the sticking place
GOLDEN RESPONSE : We definitely need to have a courageous person leading us to victory.


Speaker 2 : Encroachers!
Speaker 1 : And they have the mirror!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : This fight needs everyone to be ready. Its good to see the fighters


Speaker 2 : Get out!
Speaker 1 : Beast!
Speaker 2 : Belle!
Speaker 1 : Belle? You came back!
Speaker 2 : You came back.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its all right my dear. You came back and that’s the most important part.


Speaker 1 : Maybe it's better this way.
Speaker 2 : Don't talk like that. You'll be all right. We're together now. Everything's going to be fine. You'll see.
Speaker 1 : At least I got to see you one... last...time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I love you too! Seeing you here makes me extrememly happy


Speaker 2 : Belle! It's me!
Speaker 1 : It is you!
Speaker 2 : Lumiere! Cogsworth! Oh, Mrs. Potts! Look at us!
Speaker 1 : Well, Lumiere, old friend. Shall we let bygones be bygones?
Speaker 2 : Of course, mon ami. I told you she would break the spell.
Speaker 1 : I beg your pardon, old friend, but I believe I told you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am just glad the spell has been broken. 


Speaker 2 : Are they gonna live happily ever after, mama?
Speaker 1 : Of course, my dear. Of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no my dear. Living happily is all everyone should focus on.


Speaker 2 : Hey there! Gosh, you do take the prize for daydreaming! And I see you've toted one of the old books along with you. What is it this time poetry, I'll bet. Let me see.
Speaker 1 : Look out you don't get it full of dirt.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s such a lovely take on earth. 


Speaker 2 : Or picture me plowing.
Speaker 1 : You should have gone back to college last fall, like I know you wanted to. You're fitted for that sort of thing just as I ain't.
Speaker 2 : You know why I didn't go back, Andy. Pa didn't like the idea, even if he didn't say so; and I know he wanted the money to use improving the farm. And besides, I'm not keen on being a student, just because you see me reading books all the time. What I want to do now is keep on moving so that I won't take root in any one place.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so mcuh! Uncle is probably right


Speaker 1 : About that, he figures.
Speaker 2 : That's a long time.
Speaker 1 : Not so long when you come to consider it. You know the Sunda sails around the Horn for Yokohama first, and that's a long voyage on a sailing ship; and if we go to any of the other places Uncle Dick mentions India, or Australia, or South Africa, or South America they'll be long voyages, too.
Speaker 2 : You can have all those foreign parts for all of me. Ma's going to miss you a lot, Rob.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t be sad now! It’s a good thing you are going on a journey for.


Speaker 1 : And Pa ain't feeling none too happy to have you go though he's been trying not to show it.
Speaker 2 : I can see how he feels.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point but this is something I want to do!


Speaker 1 : I know that, too, Andy.
Speaker 2 : I'll miss you as much as anybody, I guess. You see, you and I ain't like most brothers always fighting and separated a lot of the time, while we've always been together just the two of us. It's different with us. That's why it hits so hard, I guess.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Now lets keep the sadness aside and enjoy these moments before you leave


Speaker 1 : No need to, Rob. Hell! You want to go that's all there is to it; and I wouldn't have you miss this chance for the world.
Speaker 2 : It's fine of you to feel that way, Andy.
Speaker 1 : Huh! I'd be a nice son-of-a-gun if I didn't, wouldn't I? When I know how you need this sea trip to make a new man of you in the body, I mean and give you your full health back.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand where you are coming from but just that we will really miss you.


Speaker 2 : Can't be done. Farming ain't your nature. There's all the difference shown in just the way us two feel about the farm. You well, you like the home part of it, I expect; but as a place to work and grow things, you hate it. Ain't that right?
Speaker 1 : Yes, I suppose it is. For you it's different. You're a Mayo through and through. You're wedded to the soil. You're as much a product of it as an ear of corn is, or a tree. Father is the same. This farm is his life-work, and he's happy in knowing that another Mayo, inspired by the same love, will take up the work where he leaves off. I can understand your attitude, and Pa's; and I think it's wonderful and sincere. But I well, I'm not made that way.
Speaker 2 : No, you ain't; but when it comes to understanding, I guess I realize that you've got your own angle of looking at things.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t be so surprised. I also look at things from various angles


Speaker 1 : Sure I do. You've seen a bit of the world, enough to make the farm seem small, and you've got the itch to see it all.
Speaker 2 : It's more than that, Andy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see we are on the same page in this regard


Speaker 1 : It's more than that, Andy.
Speaker 2 : Sure it is. There's always a chance of a good thing coming your way in some of those foreign ports or other. I've heard there are great opportunities for a young fellow with his eyes open in some of those new countries that are just being opened up. I'll bet that's what you've been turning over in your mind under all your quietness! Well, if you get to be a millionaire all of a sudden, call 'round once in a while and I'll pass the plate to you. We could use a lot of money right here on the farm without hurting it any.
Speaker 1 : I've never considered that practical side of it for a minute, Andy.
Speaker 2 : Well, you ought to.
Speaker 1 : No, I oughtn't. Supposing I was to tell you that it's just Beauty that's calling me, the beauty of the far off and unknown, the mystery and spell of the East which lures me in the books I've read, the need of the freedom of great wide spaces, the joy of wandering on and on in quest of the secret which is hidden over there, beyond the horizon? Suppose I told you that was the one and only reason for my going?
Speaker 2 : I should say you were nutty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Okay okay! Don’t be angry. I will have a safe trip and come back soon.


Speaker 1 : Then you might as well stay here, because we've got all you're looking for right on this farm. There's wide space enough, Lord knows; and you can have all the sea you want by walking a mile down to the beach; and there's plenty of horizon to look at, and beauty enough for anyone, except in the winter. As for the mystery and spell, I haven't met 'em yet, but they're probably lying around somewheres. I'll have you understand this is a first class farm with all the fixings.
Speaker 2 : It's no use talking to you, you chump!
Speaker 1 : You'd better not say anything to Uncle Dick about spells and things when you're on the ship. He'll likely chuck you overboard for a Jonah. I'd better run along. I've got to wash up some as long as Ruth's Ma is coming over for supper.
Speaker 2 : And Ruth.
Speaker 1 : Yes, Ruth'll be staying too. Well, I better hustle, I guess, and   .
Speaker 2 : Wait a minute, Andy! There is something I want to   .
Speaker 1 : Yes?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Okay now don’t put your mood down. We can talk when you come back.


Speaker 2 : Hello, Rob!
Speaker 1 : Hello, Ruth!
Speaker 2 : I was looking for you.
Speaker 1 : Andy just left here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh okay. Then I guess you know he just left


Speaker 2 : She's about the same. She never seems to get any better or any worse. Oh, Rob, I do wish she'd try to make the best of things that can't be helped.
Speaker 1 : Has she been nagging at you again?
Speaker 2 : She never stops nagging. No matter what I do for her she finds fault. If only Pa was still living   I suppose I shouldn't complain this way. Poor Ma, Lord knows it's hard enough for her. I suppose it's natural to be cross when you're not able ever to walk a step. Oh, I'd like to be going away some place like you!
Speaker 1 : It's hard to stay and equally hard to go, sometimes.
Speaker 2 : There! If I'm not the stupid body! I swore I wasn't going to speak about your trip until after you'd gone; and there I go, first thing!
Speaker 1 : Why didn't you want to speak of it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh mother! I will miss her dearly. She has to stop being sad though.


Speaker 2 : You and Andy will still have each other. It'll be harder for me without anyone.
Speaker 1 : But you'll have new sights and new people to take your mind off; while we'll be here with the old, familiar place to remind us every minute of the day. It's a shame you're going just at this time, in spring, when everything is getting so nice. I oughtn't to talk that way when I know going's the best thing for you. You're bound to find all sorts of opportunities to get on, your father says.
Speaker 2 : I don't give a damn about that! I wouldn't take a voyage across the road for the best opportunity in the world of the kind Pa thinks of. Excuse me, Ruth, for getting worked up over it; but Andy gave me an overdose of the practical considerations.
Speaker 1 : Well, then, if it isn't   Oh, Rob, why do you want to go?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh its not soemthing to anger you! Just a little curious.


Speaker 2 : Because   It seems such a shame.
Speaker 1 : Why?
Speaker 2 : Oh, because everything.
Speaker 1 : I could hardly back out now, even if I wanted to. And I'll be forgotten before you know it.
Speaker 2 : You won't! I'll never forget   .
Speaker 1 : Will you promise me that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to sound so. Just my parting thoughts.


Speaker 2 : Oh!
Speaker 1 : But you haven't told me your reason for leaving yet?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no absolutely not! You were as sickly as anybody could get.


Speaker 2 : Let's not think about them.
Speaker 1 : You'll have to, to understand. Well, in those days, when Ma was fixing meals, she used to get me out of the way by pushing my chair to the west window and telling me to look out and be quiet. That wasn't hard. I guess I was always quiet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t be sad now. The past is the past.


Speaker 2 : So I used to stare out over the fields to the hills, out there  and somehow after a time I'd forget any pain I was in, and start dreaming. I knew the sea was over beyond those hills, the folks had told me and I used to wonder what the sea was like, and try to form a picture of it in my mind. There was all the mystery in the world to me then about that far-off sea and there still is! It called to me then just as it does now. And other times my eyes would follow this road, winding off into the distance, toward the hills, as if it, too, was searching for the sea. And I'd promise myself that when I grew up and was strong, I'd follow that road, and it and I would find the sea together. You see, my making this trip is only keeping that promise of long ago.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I see.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes yes absolutely. It was lovely to see so much passion in your eyes.


Speaker 2 : Yes.
Speaker 1 : You feel it then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad I could make someone happy today.


Speaker 2 : So now you know why I'm going. It's for that reason that and one other.
Speaker 1 : You've another? Then you must tell me that, too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh no! Why would I ever get angry on any reason of yours!


Speaker 2 : Yes, I promise.
Speaker 1 : I love you. That's the other reason.
Speaker 2 : Oh, Rob!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s just so lovely of you to say such kind things!


Speaker 1 : I don't! I don't love Andy! I don't! Whatever put such a fool notion into into your head? Oh, Rob! Don't go away! Please! You mustn't, now! You can't! I won't let you! It'd break my my heart!
Speaker 2 : Do you mean that that you love me?
Speaker 1 : Yes, yes of course I do what d'you s'pose? You stupid thing! I've loved you right along.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh it was just a conincidence maybe but that wasn’t what I intended for you to understand.


Speaker 2 : Because you never seemed to want to go any place with me. You were always reading an old book, and not paying any attention to me. I was too proud to let you see I cared because I thought the year you had away to college had made you stuck-up, and you thought yourself too educated to waste any time on me.
Speaker 1 : And I was thinking   What fools we've both been!
Speaker 2 : You won't go away on the trip, will you, Rob? You'll tell them you can't go on account of me, won't you? You can't go now! You can't!
Speaker 1 : Perhaps you can come too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish I could but I already made a promise.


Speaker 2 : But Ruth I Uncle Dick  
Speaker 1 : He won't mind when he knows it's for your happiness to stay. How could he? Oh, Rob! And you said you loved me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you for listening to me. I just dd not want to part from you.


Speaker 2 : My, but you're strong!
Speaker 1 : Come! We'll go and tell them at once.
Speaker 2 : Oh, no, don't, Rob, not 'til after I've gone. There'd be bound to be such a scene with them all together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just funny! 


Speaker 1 : Let's go, then. .
Speaker 2 : See! The first star. Our star!
Speaker 1 : Yes. Our very own star. Come, Rob, let's go. We'll be late for supper, Rob.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh my! What fun!


Speaker 2 : How can you talk that way, Dick Scott, when you're taking our Robbie away from us, in the middle of the night, you might say, just to get on that old boat of yours on time! I think you might wait until morning when he's had his breakfast.
Speaker 1 : Ain't that a woman's way o' seein' things for you? God A'mighty, Kate, I can't give orders to the tide that it's got to be high just when it suits me to have it. I ain't gettin' no fun out o' missin' sleep and leavin' here at six bells myself. And the Sunda ain't an old ship leastways, not very old and she's good's she ever was.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish it too but if Robbie is happy, then that’s all matters.


Speaker 2 : You shouldn't be taking it so hard, 's far as I kin see. This vige'll make a man of him. I'll see to it he learns how to navigate, 'n' study for a mate's c'tificate right off and it'll give him a trade for the rest of his life, if he wants to travel.
Speaker 1 : But I don't want him to travel all his life. You've got to see he comes home when this trip is over. Then he'll be all well, and he'll want to to marry  and settle down right here. I never realized how hard it was going to be for me to have Robbie go or I wouldn't have considered it a minute.
Speaker 2 : It ain't no good goin' on that way, Kate, now it's all settled.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Kate, Robbie needs to do what he wishes to and don’t be sad about that.


Speaker 1 : Why didn't you wheel MRS Atkins back tonight, Andy? You usually do when she and Ruth come over.
Speaker 2 : I thought maybe Robert wanted to tonight. He offered to go right away when they were leaving.
Speaker 1 : He only wanted to be polite.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay son. 


Speaker 2 : Guess they was all thinkin' about tomorrow, same as us.
Speaker 1 : No. I'm afraid somethin's happened somethin' else.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get angry but yes I meant her!


Speaker 2 : I don't think Ruth loves Andy.
Speaker 1 : You don't? Well, maybe a woman's eyes is sharper in such things, but they're always together. And if she don't love him now, she'll likely come around to it in time. You seem mighty fixed in your opinion, Katey. How d'you know?
Speaker 2 : It's just what I feel.
Speaker 1 : You don't mean to say  Shucks! I'm losin' my respect for your eyesight, Katey. Why, Robert ain't got no time for Ruth, 'cept as a friend!
Speaker 2 : Sss-h-h! .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : very funny! Wanna come join me?


Speaker 1 : You ought to have worn your coat a sharp night like this, Robbie.
Speaker 2 : God A'mighty, Kate, you treat Robert as if he was one year old!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its nothing to worry about.


Speaker 1 : Yes, there is something something I must tell you all of you. Something I discovered only this evening very beautiful and wonderful something I did not take into consideration previously because I hadn't dared to hope that such happiness could ever come to me. You must all remember that fact, won't you?
Speaker 2 : Let's get to the point, son.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh son! That makes me very happy!


Speaker 1 : I asked you to remember that until this evening I didn't know myself. I had never dared to dream  
Speaker 2 : What is this foolishness you're talkin' of?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I knew it! I am just so glad for you.


Speaker 1 : Well, I'll be damned! You do beat all for gettin' folks' minds all tangled up, Robert. And Ruth too! Whatever got into her of a sudden? Why, I was thinkin'  
Speaker 2 : Never mind what you were thinking, James. It wouldn't be any use telling us that now. And what you were hoping for turns out just the same almost, doesn't it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you pa!


Speaker 1 : Thank you, Pa. .
Speaker 2 : I guess it's my turn to offer congratulations, isn't it?
Speaker 1 : Andy! Why I I didn't see you. Were you here when  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thanks Andy. Its great of you to wish us well.


Speaker 2 : Thanks, Uncle Dick.
Speaker 1 : So you're not acomin' on the Sunda with me? .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Damn right you are.


Speaker 2 : That's the right spirit, Robert. Ain't none of us doubts your willin'ness, but you ain't never learned  
Speaker 1 : Then I'm going to start learning right away, and you'll teach me, won't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so mcuh! 


Speaker 2 : A fine one you are to be talking about love, Dick an old cranky bachelor like you. Goodness sakes!
Speaker 1 : I've never been a damn fool like most, if that's what you're steerin' at.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay please don’t get upset. I dint mean to cause any anger.


Speaker 2 : I've been countin' sure on havin' Robert for company on this vige to sorta talk to and show things to, and teach, kinda, and I got my mind so set on havin' him I'm goin' to be double lonesome this vige. Darn all this silly lovin' business, anyway. But all this talk ain't tellin' me what I'm to do with that sta'b'd cabin I fixed up. It's all painted white, an' a bran new mattress on the bunk, 'n' new sheets 'n' blankets 'n' things. And Chips built in a book-case so's Robert could take his books along with a slidin' bar fixed across't it, mind, so's they couldn't fall out no matter how she rolled. What d'you suppose my officers is goin' to think when there's no one comes aboard to occupy that sta'b'd cabin? And the men what did the work on it what'll they think? They're liable as not to suspicion it was a woman I'd planned to ship along, and that she gave me the go-by at the last moment! . Gawd A'mighty! They're only lookin' to have the laugh on me for something like that. They're liable to b'lieve anything, those fellers is!
Speaker 1 : Then there's nothing to it but for you to get right out and hunt up a wife somewheres for that spick 'n' span cabin. She'll have to be a pretty one, too, to match it. You ain't got much time to find her, Dick.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry Dick. I dint mean to upset you.


Speaker 2 : Seems to me this ain't no subject to joke over not for Andy.
Speaker 1 : I agree with you, Pa, and I tell you again, once and for all, that I've made up my mind to go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to cause any anger. I just have my reasons.


Speaker 2 : No reason? Can you stand there and say that to me, Andrew?
Speaker 1 : He doesn't mean a word of it, James.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand James but I just changed my mind


Speaker 2 : Rob'll hold his end up as soon as he learns.
Speaker 1 : Robert was never cut out for a farmer, and you was.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am sure. Thanks for the advice.


Speaker 2 : I won't argue with you, Pa. You can think as badly of me as you like.
Speaker 1 : You know I'm speakin' truth that's why you're afraid to argy! You lie when you say you want to go 'way and see thin's! You ain't got no likin' in the world to go. I've watched you grow up, and I know your ways, and they're my ways. You're runnin' against your own nature, and you're goin' to be a'mighty sorry for it if you do. 'S if I didn't know your real reason for runnin' away! And runnin' away's the only words to fit it. You're runnin' away 'cause you're put out and riled 'cause your own brother's got Ruth 'stead o' you, and  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t get angry. I dint mean anything bad.


Speaker 2 : You're wrong, Pa, it isn't truth. I don't love Ruth. I never loved her, and the thought of such a thing never entered my head.
Speaker 1 : Hump! You're pilin' lie on lie!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you can see the positive side of it.


Speaker 2 : James! James! Where are you going?
Speaker 1 : I'm goin' to bed, Katey. It's late, Katey it's late. .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be upset. I was merely making a point but I understand your point.


Speaker 2 : But it's a lie, Andy, a lie!
Speaker 1 : Of course it's a lie. You know it and I know it, but that's all ought to know it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sad. I only wanted to have some adventure.


Speaker 2 : You know better than to ask that. You know why. I can wish you and Ruth all the good luck in the world, and I do, and I mean it; but you can't expect me to stay around here and watch you two together, day after day and me alone. I couldn't stand it not after all the plans I'd made to happen on this place thinking   thinking she cared for me.
Speaker 1 : God! It's horrible! I feel so guilty to think that I should be the cause of your suffering, after we've been such pals all our lives. If I could have foreseen what'd happen, I swear to you I'd have never said a word to Ruth. I swear I wouldn't have, Andy!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see the positive side of this.


Speaker 2 : But think of Ma! God, Andy, you can't go! You can't!
Speaker 1 : I've got to go to get away! I've got to, I tell you. I'd go crazy here, bein' reminded every second of the day what a fool I'd made of myself. I've got to get away and try and forget, if I can. And I'd hate the farm if I stayed, hate it for bringin' things back. I couldn't take interest in the work any more, work with no purpose in sight. Can't you see what a hell it'd be? You love her too, Rob. Put yourself in my place, and remember I haven't stopped loving her, and couldn't if I was to stay. Would that be fair to you or to her? Put yourself in my place. What'd you do then? Tell me the truth! You love her. What'd you do?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you for your input.


Speaker 2 : Then you know why I got to go; and there's nothing more to be said.
Speaker 1 : Why did this have to happen to us? It's damnable! .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you can see the other angle to this.


Speaker 2 : Andy! Oh, I wish I could tell you half I feel of how fine you are!
Speaker 1 : Shut up! Let's go to bed. I've got to be up long before sun-up. You, too, if you're going to drive us down.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you fr driving.


Speaker 2 : Robert's late for his dinner again, as usual. I don't see why Ruth puts up with it, and I've told her so. Many's the time I've said to her “It's about time you put a stop to his nonsense. Does he suppose you're runnin' a hotel with no one to help with things?” But she don't pay no attention. She's as bad as he is, a'most thinks she knows better than an old, sick body like me.
Speaker 1 : Robbie's always late for things. He can't help it, Sarah.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be sad about any of this. I wish I dint have to find excuses


Speaker 2 : Robbie can't.
Speaker 1 : Can't! It do make me mad, Kate Mayo, to see folks that God gave all the use of their limbs to potterin' round and wastin' time doin' everything the wrong way and me powerless to help and at their mercy, you might say. And it ain't that I haven't pointed the right way to 'em. I've talked to Robert thousands of times and told him how things ought to be done. You know that, Kate Mayo. But d'you s'pose he takes any notice of what I say? Or Ruth, either my own daughter? No, they think I'm a crazy, cranky old woman, half dead a'ready, and the sooner I'm in the grave and out o' their way the better it'd suit them.
Speaker 2 : You mustn't talk that way, Sarah. They're not as wicked as that. And you've got years and years before you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to upset you. I am sure you have your reasons.


Speaker 1 : Things might be worse. Robert never had any experience in farming. You can't expect him to learn in a day.
Speaker 2 : He's had three years to learn, and he's gettin' worse 'stead of better. Not on'y your place but mine too is driftin' to rack and ruin, and I can't do nothin' to prevent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he does. 


Speaker 1 : What good's workin' hard if it don't accomplish anythin', I'd like to know?
Speaker 2 : Robbie's had bad luck against him.
Speaker 1 : Say what you've a mind to, Kate, the proof of the puddin's in the eatin'; and you can't deny that things have been goin' from bad to worse ever since your husband died two years back.
Speaker 2 : It was God's will that he should be taken.
Speaker 1 : It was God's punishment on James Mayo for the blasphemin' and denyin' of God he done all his sinful life! There, Kate, I shouldn't be remindin' you, I know. He's at peace, poor man, and forgiven, let's pray.
Speaker 2 : James was a good man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is sweet to care enough for me. I appreciate your effort you have put in behinid my back.


Speaker 1 : You can tell me if you want to.
Speaker 2 : Ruth was almost crazy about it. Robert told her he'd have to mortgage the farm said he didn't know how he'd pull through 'til harvest without it, and he can't get money any other way. Now what do you think of your Robert?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes indeed. Anyway lets not go there


Speaker 1 : You don't mean to say you're goin' to sign away your farm, Kate Mayo after me warnin' you?
Speaker 2 : I'll do what Robbie says is needful.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t be so upset. I do not want any more drama in my life.


Speaker 1 : Maybe Robbie'll manage till Andy gets back and sees to things. It can't be long now.
Speaker 2 : Ruth says Andy ought to turn up any day. When does Robert figger he'll get here?
Speaker 1 : He says he can't calculate exactly on account o' the Sunda being a sail boat. Last letter he got was from England, the day they were sailing for home. That was over a month ago, and Robbie thinks they're overdue now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes I hope he makes it in time and safe.


Speaker 2 : Andy has been working. He's head officer on Dick's boat, he wrote Robbie. You know that.
Speaker 1 : That foolin' on ships is all right for a spell, but he must be right sick of it by this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish the same. Lets hope for the best


Speaker 2 : He never would have not James Mayo! Didn't he keep his heart hardened against him till the last in spite of all you and Robert did to soften him?
Speaker 1 : Don't you dare say that! Oh, I know deep down in his heart he forgave Andy, though he was too stubborn ever to own up to it. It was that brought on his death breaking his heart just on account of his stubborn pride. .
Speaker 2 : It was the will of God. Drat that young one! Seems as if she cries all the time on purpose to set a body's nerves on edge.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope they fell well soon. Don’t want her crying so much


Speaker 1 : Land sakes, if this isn't a scorcher! That kitchen's like a furnace. Phew! .
Speaker 2 : Why didn't you call me to help with the dishes?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s so sweet of you to care for me. 


Speaker 1 : Dolly, Mama! Dolly!
Speaker 2 : It's time for your nap. You can't play with Dolly now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh don’t start yelling I am here!


Speaker 1 : Let's hope the farm'll look more natural, too, when he's had a hand at it. The way thin's are now!
Speaker 2 : Will you stop harping on that, Ma? We all know things aren't as they might be. What's the good of your complaining all the time?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s not what I meant. Lets try to talk this through.


Speaker 1 : Never mind. Andy'll fix everything when he comes.
Speaker 2 : Oh, yes, I know he will. He always did know just the right thing ought to be done. It's a shame for him to come home and have to start in with things in such a topsy-turvy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am sure andy will he always has been great at managing


Speaker 1 : Hump! Land o' Goshen, but it's bakin' in here! Let's go out in under the trees in back where there's a breath of fresh air. Come, Kate. You better come too, Ruth. It'll do you good. Learn him a lesson and let him get his own dinner. Don't be such a fool.
Speaker 2 : He wouldn't mind. He doesn't eat much. But I can't go anyway. I've got to put baby to bed.
Speaker 1 : Let's go, Kate. I'm boilin' in here. .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sure. Mary needs to be in bed on time.


Speaker 2 : Phew! The sun's hot today! .
Speaker 1 : Why don't you shave? You look awful.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you might be right. The weather really is troublesome


Speaker 2 : Dada! Dada!
Speaker 1 : And how's this little girl of mine this hot day, eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Aww my sweet little girl


Speaker 2 : Don't do that to her! You know it's time for her nap and you'll get her all waked up; then I'll be the one that'll have to sit beside her till she falls asleep.
Speaker 1 : You needn't bother. I'll put her to bed.
Speaker 2 : You've got to get back to your work, I s'pose.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its not that. I just miss andy


Speaker 1 : I've got a right to read it, haven't I? He says it's meant for all of us.
Speaker 2 : Right? Don't be so silly. There's no question of right. I was only saying that you must know all that's in it after so many readings.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please! don’t get upset I was merely stating a fact


Speaker 1 : Dada, Dada.
Speaker 2 : Let's see: Does your mother take off your shoes and stockings before your nap?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good!


Speaker 1 : For heaven's sakes, put down that old book! Don't you see your dinner's getting cold?
Speaker 2 : Excuse me, Ruth. I didn't notice. .
Speaker 1 : I should think you might have some feeling for me, Rob, and not always be late for meals. If you think it's fun sweltering in that oven of a kitchen to keep things warm for you, you're mistaken.
Speaker 2 : I'm sorry, Ruth, really I am. Something crops up every day to delay me. I mean to be here on time.
Speaker 1 : Mean-tos don't count.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t let anger come between your food. Have it.


Speaker 2 : I'd have to wait just the same to wash up after you.
Speaker 1 : But I can wash up.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t get upset. I will make sure evrything is washed up


Speaker 2 : The food is lucky to be able to get cold this weather. .
Speaker 1 : And besides, you've got your own work that's got to be done.
Speaker 2 : Yes, of course.
Speaker 1 : Work you'll never get done by reading books all the time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to upset you. I was just trying to understand you.


Speaker 2 : Because I'm too stupid to understand them, I s'pose you were going to say.
Speaker 1 : No no. Why do you goad me into saying things I don't mean? Haven't I got my share of troubles trying to work this cursed farm without your adding to them? You know how hard I've tried to keep things going in spite of bad luck  
Speaker 2 : Bad luck!
Speaker 1 : And my own very apparent unfitness for the job, I was going to add; but you can't deny there's been bad luck to it, too. Why don't you take things into consideration? Why can't we pull together? We used to. I know it's hard on you also. Then why can't we help each other instead of hindering?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you do. So lets work on it together from now on.


Speaker 2 : The mowin' machine's bust.
Speaker 1 : Why, that can't be. The man fixed it only last week.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! its al right let me take care of it.


Speaker 2 : And can't you fix it?
Speaker 1 : No. Don't know what's the matter with the goll-darned thing. 'Twon't work, anyhow.
Speaker 2 : Wait a minute and I'll go look it over. There can't be much the matter with it.
Speaker 1 : Don't make no diff'rence t' me whether there be or not. I'm quittin'.
Speaker 2 : You don't mean you're throwing up your job here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you must be in a fix to be losing your temper. I will pay what I owe you in no time.


Speaker 1 : But why are you quitting now, Ben, when you know I've so much work on hand? I'll have a hard time getting another man at such short notice.
Speaker 2 : That's for you to figger. I'm quittin'.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Its not that. I just do not want to be working here anymore.


Speaker 1 : No. 'Tain't that. Look-a-here. I'm sick o' being made fun at, that's what; an' I got a job up to Timms' place; an' I'm quittin' here.
Speaker 2 : Being made fun of? I don't understand you. Who's making fun of you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I am not sure how to help you with that but I am glad you came to me.


Speaker 1 : That's a queer reason for leaving me flat. Won't they laugh at you just the same when you're working for Timms?
Speaker 2 : They wouldn't dare to. Timms is the best farm hereabouts. They was laughin' at me for workin' for you, that's what! “How're things up to the Mayo place?” they hollers every mornin'. “What's Robert doin' now pasturin' the cattle in the cornlot? Is he seasonin' his hay with rain this year, same as last?” they shouts. “Or is he inventin' some 'lectrical milkin' engine to fool them dry cows o' his into givin' hard cider?” That's like they talks; and I ain't goin' to put up with it no longer. Everyone's always knowed me as a first-class hand hereabouts, and I ain't wantin' 'em to get no different notion. So I'm quittin' you. And I wants what's comin' to me.
Speaker 1 : Oh, if that's the case, you can go to the devil. You'll get your money tomorrow when I get back from town not before!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t want anymore trouble. I will deliver the money to you as promised.


Speaker 2 : He wouldn't dare act that way with anyone else! It's lucky Andy's coming back.
Speaker 1 : Yes, Andy'll see the right thing to do in a jiffy. I wonder if the old chump's changed much? He doesn't seem to from his letters, does he? But just the same I doubt if he'll want to settle down to a hum-drum farm life, after all he's been through.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he does and the farm needs someone to look after it.


Speaker 2 : Gad, the things he's seen and experienced! Think of the places he's been! All the wonderful far places I used to dream about! God, how I envy him! What a trip! .
Speaker 1 : I s'pose you're sorry now you didn't go?
Speaker 2 : Oh, those cursed hills out there that I used to think promised me so much! How I've grown to hate the sight of them! They're like the walls of a narrow prison yard shutting me in from all the freedom and wonder of life! Sometimes I think if it wasn't for you, Ruth, and  little Mary, I'd chuck everything up and walk down the road with just one desire in my heart to put the whole rim of the world between me and those hills, and be able to breathe freely once more! There I go dreaming again - my old fool dreams.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. Lets both take a moment and talk about it


Speaker 1 : And Andy, who's had the chance what has he got out of it? His letters read like the diary of a of a farmer! “We're in Singapore now. It's a dirty hole of a place and hotter than hell. Two of the crew are down with fever and we're short-handed on the work. I'll be damn glad when we sail again, although tacking back and forth in these blistering seas is a rotten job too!” That's about the way he summed up his impressions of the East.
Speaker 2 : You needn't make fun of Andy.
Speaker 1 : When I think but what's the use? You know I wasn't making fun of Andy personally, but his attitude toward things is  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I had no idea you were so distressed. 


Speaker 2 : Stop that kind of talk, do you hear?
Speaker 1 : You findin' fault with your own brother who's ten times the man you ever was or ever will be! You're jealous, that's what! Jealous because he's made a man of himself, while you're nothing but a but a   .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please lets take a moment to understand each other


Speaker 2 : I won't! I won't never be sorry! I'm only saying what I've been thinking for years.
Speaker 1 : Ruth! You can't mean that!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Ruth I understand your pain and I have been negligent but please calm down


Speaker 2 : And now I'm finding out what you're really like what a a creature I've been living with. God! It wasn't that I haven't guessed how mean and small you are but I've kept on telling myself that I must be wrong like a fool! like a damned fool!
Speaker 1 : You were saying you'd go out on the road if it wasn't for me. Well, you can go, and the sooner the better! I don't care! I'll be glad to get rid of you! The farm'll be better off too. There's been a curse on it ever since you took hold. So go! Go and be a tramp like you've always wanted. It's all you're good for. I can get along without you, don't you worry. Andy's coming back, don't forget that! He'll attend to things like they should be. He'll show what a man can do! I don't need you. Andy's coming!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not trying to be evil here. All I want is for you to understand


Speaker 2 : Yes I do mean it! I'd say it if you was to kill me! I do love Andy. I do! I do! I always loved him. And he loves me! He loves me! I know he does. He always did! And you know he did, too! So go! Go if you want to!
Speaker 1 : You you slut!
Speaker 2 : Andy! Andy! .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for hurting you like this 


Speaker 1 : Dada sick?
Speaker 2 : No, dear. Why?
Speaker 1 : Play wif Mary.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok dada. I understand


Speaker 2 : Yes, Dada!
Speaker 1 : No, dear. Dada does feel sick a little. He's got a bad headache.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes baby dad has a bad head


Speaker 2 : There! It's better now, dear, thank you. Would you like Dada to go away? far, far away?
Speaker 1 : No! No! No, Dada, no!
Speaker 2 : Don't you like Uncle Andy the man that came yesterday not the old man with the white mustache the other?
Speaker 1 : Mary loves Dada.
Speaker 2 : He won't go away, baby. He was only joking. He couldn't leave his little Mary. .
Speaker 1 : Oh! Hurt!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok dada! Thank you.


Speaker 2 : Here you are, eh?
Speaker 1 : Hello, Andy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Andy, is there something I can help you with?


Speaker 2 : I come up here now because it's the coolest place on the farm. I've given up dreaming.
Speaker 1 : I don't believe it. You can't have changed that much. Say, it sure brings back old times to be up here with you having a chin all by our lonesomes again. I feel great being back home.
Speaker 2 : It's great for us to have you back.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good that you are back and concerned. I have been trying my best


Speaker 1 : Never mind the damn farm! Let's talk about something interesting. This is the first chance I've had to have a word with you alone. Tell me about your trip.
Speaker 2 : Why, I thought I told you everything in my letters.
Speaker 1 : Your letters were sketchy, to say the least.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I hope you were well


Speaker 2 : Then you were through a typhoon?
Speaker 1 : Yes in the China sea. Had to run before it under bare poles for two days. I thought we were bound down for Davy Jones, sure. Never dreamed waves could get so big or the wind blow so hard. If it hadn't been for Uncle Dick being such a good skipper we'd have gone to the sharks, all of us. As it was we came out minus a main top-mast and had to beat back to Hong-Kong for repairs. But I must have written you all this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh that’s my bad. Lets chat and I can tell you everything


Speaker 2 : Well, there was so much dirty work getting things ship-shape again I must have forgotten about it.
Speaker 1 : Forget a typhoon? You're a strange combination, Andy. And is what you've told me all you remember about it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you got to see the beautiful sea and had a good time.


Speaker 2 : The sea doesn't seem to have impressed you very favorably.
Speaker 1 : I should say it didn't! I'll never set foot on a ship again if I can help it except to carry me some place I can't get to by train.
Speaker 2 : But you studied to become an officer!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good that you could make an officer out of yourself.


Speaker 1 : So all you found in the East was a stench?
Speaker 2 : A stench! Ten thousand of them!
Speaker 1 : But you did like some of the places, judging from your letters Sydney, Buenos Aires  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I get it. Let me know what help I can be of.


Speaker 2 : So you're not going to stay on the farm?
Speaker 1 : Why sure not! Did you think I was? There wouldn't be any sense. One of us is enough to run this little place.
Speaker 2 : I suppose it does seem small to you now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Sounds like a very big chance!


Speaker 1 : It's fine for you, Andy.
Speaker 2 : We call this a farm but you ought to hear about the farms down there ten square miles where we've got an acre. It's a new country where big things are opening up and I want to get in on something big before I die. I'm no fool when it comes to farming, and I know something about grain. I've been reading up a lot on it, too, lately. Wake up, you old poetry book worm, you! I know my talking about business makes you want to choke me, doesn't it?
Speaker 1 : No, Andy, I I just happened to think of something else. There've been lots of times lately that I've wished I had some of your faculty for business.
Speaker 2 : There's something I want to talk about, Rob, the farm. You don't mind, do you?
Speaker 1 : No.
Speaker 2 : I walked over it this morning with Ruth and she told me about things   I could see the place had run down; but you mustn't blame yourself. When luck's against anyone  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I feel you shouldn’t put yourself down for it. You have done a great job


Speaker 1 : I've got over a thousand saved, and you can have that.
Speaker 2 : No. You need that for your start in Buenos Aires.
Speaker 1 : I don't. I can  
Speaker 2 : No, Andy! Once and for all, no! I won't hear of it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I appreciate your offer but it seems too much


Speaker 1 : Oh, everything'll be on a sound footing after harvest. Don't worry about it.
Speaker 2 : Maybe. It's too bad Pa couldn't have lived to see things through. It cut me up a lot hearing he was dead. He never softened up, did he about me, I mean?
Speaker 1 : He never understood, that's a kinder way of putting it. He does now.
Speaker 2 : You've forgotten all about what caused me to go, haven't you, Rob? I was a slushier damn fool in those days than you were. But it was an act of Providence I did go. It opened my eyes to how I'd been fooling myself. Why, I'd forgotten all about that before I'd been at sea six months.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you caught on pretty quick! 


Speaker 1 : Yes. I didn't want you to get false notions in your head, or I wouldn't say anything. I'm telling you the truth when I say I'd forgotten long ago. It don't sound well for me, getting over things so easy, but I guess it never really amounted to more than a kid idea I was letting rule me. I'm certain now I never was in love I was getting fun out of thinking I was and being a hero to myself. There! Gosh, I'm glad that's off my chest. I've been feeling sort of awkward ever since I've been home, thinking of what you two might think. You've got it all straight now, haven't you, Rob?
Speaker 2 : Yes, Andy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will find the courage to clear things up with Ruth


Speaker 1 : Perhaps for her sake you'd better not tell her.
Speaker 2 : For her sake? Oh, you mean she wouldn't want to be reminded of my foolishness? Still, I think it'd be worse if  
Speaker 1 : Do as you please, Andy; but for God's sake, let's not talk about it! Excuse me, Andy. This rotten headache has my nerves shot to pieces.
Speaker 2 : It's all right, Rob long as you're not sore at me.
Speaker 1 : Where did Uncle Dick disappear to this morning?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good! It would be great to meet Uncle Dick


Speaker 2 : Hello, dear! Jake wants to see you about something. He finished working where he was. He's waiting for you at the road.
Speaker 1 : I'll go down right away. .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thanks. I am headed out


Speaker 2 : I've taken a holiday in honor of your arrival. I feel so free I'd like to have wings and fly over the sea. You're a man. You can't know how awful and stupid it is cooking and washing dishes all the time.
Speaker 1 : I can guess.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand her excitement of having me back!


Speaker 2 : That's just like Ma, bless her!
Speaker 1 : She's missed you terrible. We all have. And you can't deny the farm has, after what I showed you and told you when we was looking over the place this morning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes it looks so. I hope he does well


Speaker 2 : It's his own fault. He never takes any interest in things.
Speaker 1 : You can't blame him. He wasn't born for it; but I know he's done his best for your sake and the old folks and the little girl.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think he would do wonders if given a chance.


Speaker 2 : Yes, Rob hasn't got that. He's frank to own up to that himself. I'm going to try and hire a good man for him an experienced farmer to work the place on a salary and percentage. That'll take it off of Rob's hands, and he needn't be worrying himself to death any more. He looks all worn out, Ruth. He ought to be careful.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I s'pose. Why do you want to hire a man to oversee things? Seems as if now that you're back it wouldn't be needful.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you will you be gone again? Another adventure?


Speaker 2 : Gone!
Speaker 1 : Yes. When I leave for the Argentine again.
Speaker 2 : You're going away to sea!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh that’s great news! I hope you do wonders


Speaker 1 : But that's far off isn't it?
Speaker 2 : Six thousand miles more or less. It's quite a trip. I've got a peach of a chance down there, Ruth. Ask Rob if I haven't. I've just been telling him all about it.
Speaker 1 : And didn't he try to stop you from going?
Speaker 2 : No, of course not. Why?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes he is like that. 


Speaker 1 : Rob's too good a chum to try and stop me when he knows I'm set on a thing. And he could see just as soon's I told him what a good chance it was.
Speaker 2 : And you're bound on going?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are more than welcome to do so!


Speaker 1 : I s'pose. Oh, Andy, you can't go! You can't. Why we've all thought we've all been hoping and praying you was coming home to stay, to settle down on the farm and see to things. You mustn't go! Think of how your Ma'll take on if you go and how the farm'll be ruined if you leave it to Rob to look after. You can see that.
Speaker 2 : Rob hasn't done so bad. When I get a man to direct things the farm'll be safe enough.
Speaker 1 : But your Ma think of her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I suppose she is but she would be happier with you here. Anyway, if you have made u your mind then good luck!


Speaker 2 : Yes I s'pose I ought. What did Rob tell you about me?
Speaker 1 : Tell? About you? Why, nothing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no nothing at all.


Speaker 2 : No, he didn't mention you, I can remember. Why? What made you think he did?
Speaker 1 : Oh, I wish I could tell if you're lying or not!
Speaker 2 : What're you talking about? I didn't used to lie to you, did I? And what in the name of God is there to lie for?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure I am with you at this point but I need to be leaving


Speaker 1 : Oh, is that what you're driving at? Well, you needn't worry about that no more   I don't blame you, Ruth, feeling embarrassed having me around again, after the way I played the dumb fool about going away last time.
Speaker 2 : Oh, Andy!
Speaker 1 : I know I oughtn't to talk about such foolishness to you. Still I figure it's better to get it out of my system so's we three can be together same's years ago, and not be worried thinking one of us might have the wrong notion.
Speaker 2 : Andy! Please! Don't!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! I was hoping that I wasn’t the reason you were leaving


Speaker 1 : For God's sake, Andy won't you please stop talking! .
Speaker 2 : Seem's if I put my foot in it whenever I open my mouth today. Rob shut me up with almost the same words when I tried speaking to him about it.
Speaker 1 : You told him what you've told me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Atleast we wont misunderstand


Speaker 2 : I didn't look for you this soon, Uncle.
Speaker 1 : I didn't figger it, neither; but I run across a bit o' news down to the Seamen's Home made me 'bout ship and set all sail back here to find you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nothing to worry about


Speaker 2 : Yes, I guess I will. It'll be the best thing for all of us in the end, don't you think so, Rob? .
Speaker 1 : Then, that's settled.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are so energetic about this!


Speaker 2 : You'll both be here for dinner, won't you?
Speaker 1 : I don't know. Will there be time? What time is it now, I wonder?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : then I will gladly stay!


Speaker 2 : Dada, Mama's cryin', Dada.
Speaker 1 : No, she isn't, little girl. The sun hurts her eyes, that's all. Aren't you beginning to feel hungry, Mary?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good mary, lets have something 


Speaker 2 : I won't wake her. .
Speaker 1 : You better come near the fire where it's warm.
Speaker 2 : No. I'm burning up now.
Speaker 1 : That's the fever. You know the doctor told you not to get up and move round.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish he listened to me. I will try my best though


Speaker 2 : How are you feeling now?
Speaker 1 : Better! Much better than I've felt in ages. Really I'm fine now only very weak. It's the turning point, I guess. From now on I'll pick up so quick I'll surprise you and no thanks to that old fool of a country quack, either.
Speaker 2 : He's always tended to us.
Speaker 1 : Always helped us to die, you mean! He “tended” to Pa and Ma and  and to Mary.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : maybe andy's specialist could do wonders! Lets hope for the best.


Speaker 2 : Is that why you're waiting up all night?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : For Andy?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good that someone is waiting for him when he gets back


Speaker 1 : Five years! It's a long time.
Speaker 2 : Yes.
Speaker 1 : To wait!
Speaker 2 : It's past now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you excited about reading it again. 


Speaker 1 : Here. The first one's on top.
Speaker 2 : New York. “Just landed from steamer. Have important business to wind up here. Will be home as soon as deal is completed.” Business first was always Andy's motto “Hope you are all well. Andy.” “Hope you are all well!”
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you did a good job by informing him


Speaker 1 : Of course he couldn't. I'm a fool. I'm touchy about nothing lately. Just what did you say in your reply?
Speaker 2 : I had to send it collect.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t panic. I dint give any specifics


Speaker 1 : I wrote you had lung trouble.
Speaker 2 : You are a fool! How often have I explained to you that it's pleurisy is the matter with me. You can't seem to get it in your head that the pleura is outside the lungs, not in them!
Speaker 1 : I only wrote what Doctor Smith told me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. Anger might worsen your pleurisy.


Speaker 2 : Makes no difference. I had to tell Andy something, didn't I?
Speaker 1 : He sent this last evening. Let's see. “Leave for home on midnight train. Just received your wire. Am bringing specialist to see Rob. Will motor to farm from Port.” What time is it now?
Speaker 2 : Round six, must be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its pleasant to see you become happy about calling a specialist


Speaker 1 : You've been coughing an awful lot lately.
Speaker 2 : What nonsense! For God's sake, haven't you ever had a bad cold yourself? Your mother is lucky to be able to sleep so soundly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for snapping on you but its good that your mother has you nearby


Speaker 1 : Is she waiting for Andy, too? I couldn't get to sleep to save my soul. I counted ten million sheep if I counted one. No use! I gave up trying finally and just laid there in the dark thinking. I was thinking about you, Ruth of how hard these last years must have been for you. I'm sorry, Ruth.
Speaker 2 : I don't know. They're past now. They were hard on all of us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not but our hopes down. Your sickness comes first


Speaker 1 : Mary's better off being dead.
Speaker 2 : We'd all be better off for that matter. You tell that mother of yours she's got to stop saying that Mary's death was due to a weak constitution inherited from me. It's got to stop, I tell you!
Speaker 1 : S-h-h! You'll wake her; and then she'll nag at me not you.
Speaker 2 : It's all because your mother's down on me for not begging Andy for help.
Speaker 1 : You might have. He's got plenty.
Speaker 2 : How can you of all people think of taking money from him?
Speaker 1 : I don't see the harm. He's your own brother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please understand that I don’t hate you so stop putting yourself down about it. 


Speaker 2 : I don't hate you. It's been my fault too, I s'pose.
Speaker 1 : No. You couldn't help loving Andy.
Speaker 2 : I don't love anyone.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would love to see your journey of becoming a writer.


Speaker 1 : There's Ma.
Speaker 2 : She can come with us.
Speaker 1 : She wouldn't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s not the case. Ma is the reason


Speaker 2 : What's the matter? I'll go with you, Rob. Stop that coughing for goodness' sake! It's awful bad for you. I'll go with you to the city soon's you're well again. Honest I will, Rob, I promise! Do you feel better now?
Speaker 1 : Yes. Then you will go, Ruth?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That makes me ecstatic. I am glad we understand each other


Speaker 2 : We'll make a new start, Ruth just you and I. Life owes us some happiness after what we've been through. It must! Otherwise our suffering would be meaningless and that is unthinkable.
Speaker 1 : Yes, yes, of course, Rob, but you mustn't  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! We have our new life ahead of us after these horrible years


Speaker 2 : Yes, yes, but do be  
Speaker 1 : Nonsense! I won't be careful. I'm getting back all my strength. See! I feel light as a feather. One kiss the first in years, isn't it? to greet the dawn of a new life together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh all right! Don’t go all crazy on me


Speaker 2 : I won't sit down. You're silly to worry. Listen. All our suffering has been a test through which we had to pass to prove ourselves worthy of a finer realization. And we did pass through it! It hasn't broken us! And now the dream is to come true! Don't you see?
Speaker 1 : Yes, Rob, I see; but won't you go back to bed now and rest?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : watching the sun with your would be a memory to remember


Speaker 2 : Glory be! What's the matter with you?
Speaker 1 : It was Rob. He's just been talking to me out here. I put him back to bed. He acted funny; and his eyes looked so so wild like.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for scaring you but Rob did not look well


Speaker 2 : I was afraid. He talked so crazy. I couldn't quiet him. I didn't want to be alone with him that way. Lord knows what he might do.
Speaker 1 : Humph! A help I'd be to you and me not able to move a step! Why didn't you run and get Jake?
Speaker 2 : Jake isn't here. He quit last night. He hasn't been paid in three months.
Speaker 1 : I can't blame him. What decent person'd want to work on a place like this? Oh, I wish you'd never married that man!
Speaker 2 : You oughtn't to talk about him now when he's sick in his bed.
Speaker 1 : You know very well, Ruth Mayo, if it wasn't for me helpin' you on the sly out of my savin's, you'd both been in the poor house and all 'count of his pigheaded pride in not lettin' Andy know the state thin's were in. A nice thin' for me to have to support him out of what I'd saved for my last days and me an invalid with no one to look to!
Speaker 2 : Andy'll pay you back, Ma. I can tell him so's Rob'll never know.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ma please let the topic alone. If rob found out about the money he would not like it.


Speaker 1 : He didn't think about it, I s'pose. He said he'd made up his mind to ask Andy for help when he comes. Six o'clock. Andy ought to get here directly.
Speaker 2 : D'you think this special doctor'll do Rob any good?
Speaker 1 : I don't know. .
Speaker 2 : For goodness' sake put some wood on that fire. I'm most freezin'!
Speaker 1 : Don't talk so loud. Let him sleep if he can. This is the last of the wood. I don't know who'll cut more now that Jake's left. It's getting gray out. Looks like it'd be a nice day. Must've been a heavy frost last night. We're paying for the spell of warm weather we've been having. .
Speaker 2 : S-h-h! Listen! Ain't that an auto I hear?
Speaker 1 : Yes. It's Andy, I s'pose.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! I should clean up this room to make a good impression. Thank you for your advice.


Speaker 2 : I got here as soon as I could. My sister-in-law, MRS Mayo Doctor Fawcett. Where's Rob?
Speaker 1 : In there.
Speaker 2 : I'll take your coat and hat, Doctor. Is he very bad, Ruth?
Speaker 1 : He's been getting weaker.
Speaker 2 : Damn! This way, Doctor. Bring the lamp, Ruth. .
Speaker 1 : How long has this been going on?
Speaker 2 : You mean how long has he been sick?
Speaker 1 : Of course! What else?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that must have been a terrible time for all of you. I wish him a speedy recovery.


Speaker 2 : Why didn't you let me know cable me? Do you want him to die, all of you? I'm damned if it doesn't look that way! Poor old chap! To be sick in this out-of-the-way hole without anyone to attend to him but a country quack! It's a damned shame!
Speaker 1 : I wanted to send you word once, but he only got mad when I told him. He was too proud to ask anything, he said.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t be upset. I was only doing what I was told. He let his pride get in the way


Speaker 2 : A letter takes so long to get where you were and we couldn't afford to telegraph. We owed everyone already, and I couldn't ask Ma. She'd been giving me money out of her savings till she hadn't much left. Don't say anything to Rob about it. I never told him. He'd only be mad at me if he knew. But I had to, because God knows how we'd have got on if I hadn't.
Speaker 1 : You mean to say   You sent that telegram to me collect. Was it because   Good God! And all this time I've been why I've had everything! But I can't get it through my head. Why? Why? What has happened? How did it ever come about? Tell me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh god! This is bad but I am glad you did what you could for Rob! Don’t put yourself down for that.


Speaker 2 : Why, damn it, this is frightful! Rob must be mad not to have let me know. Too proud to ask help of me! What's the matter with him in God's name? Ruth! Tell me the truth. His mind hasn't gone back on him, has it?
Speaker 1 : I don't know. Mary's dying broke him up terrible but he's used to her being gone by this, I s'pose.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : these things take time. I am getting there though


Speaker 2 : There's a time comes when you don't mind any more anything.
Speaker 1 : I'm sorry, Ruth if I seemed to blame you. I didn't realize   The sight of Rob lying in bed there, so gone to pieces it made me furious at everyone. Forgive me, Ruth.
Speaker 2 : There's nothing to forgive. It doesn't matter.
Speaker 1 : Thank God I came back before it was too late. This doctor will know exactly what to do. That's the first thing to think of. When Rob's on his feet again we can get the farm working on a sound basis once more. I'll see to that before I leave.
Speaker 2 : You're going away again?
Speaker 1 : I've got to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I did but now something has come up. I hope Rob gets well soon.


Speaker 2 : I expected to until I got to New York. Then I learned certain facts that make it necessary. To be candid, Ruth, I'm not the rich man you've probably been led to believe by my letters not now. I was when I wrote them. I made money hand over fist as long as I stuck to legitimate trading; but I wasn't content with that. I wanted it to come easier, so like all the rest of the idiots, I tried speculation. Oh, I won all right! Several times I've been almost a millionaire on paper and then come down to earth again with a bump. Finally the strain was too much. I got disgusted with myself and made up my mind to get out and come home and forget it and really live again. And now comes the funny part. The day before the steamer sailed I saw what I thought was a chance to become a millionaire again. That easy! I plunged. Then, before things broke, I left I was so confident I couldn't be wrong. But when I landed in New York I wired you I had business to wind up, didn't I? Well, it was the business that wound me up! .
Speaker 1 : You found you'd lost everything?
Speaker 2 : Practically. Oh, I don't mean I'm dead broke. I've saved ten thousand from the wreckage, maybe twenty. But that's a poor showing for five years' hard work. That's why I'll have to go back.  I can make it up in a year or so down there and I don't need but a shoestring to start with. I wish I didn't have to. I'm sick of it all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I appreciate your concern and sorrow. I will try to be as worthy as I can and earn back all that I lost and more.


Speaker 1 : They might be much worse. There's enough left to fix the farm O. K. before I go. I won't leave 'til Rob's on his feet again. In the meantime I'll make things fly around here. I need a rest, and the kind of rest I need is hard work in the open just like I used to do in the old days. Not a word to Rob about my losing money! Remember that, Ruth! You can see why. If he's grown so touchy he'd never accept a cent if he thought I was hard up; see?
Speaker 2 : Yes, Andy. .
Speaker 1 : Ah, Doctor! Won't you have a chair?
Speaker 1 : Ruth!
Speaker 2 : I am afraid my diagnosis of your brother's condition forces me to the same conclusion as MRS Mayo's.
Speaker 1 : But, Doctor, surely  
Speaker 2 : Your brother hasn't long to live perhaps a few days, perhaps only a few hours. It's a marvel that he's alive at this moment. My examination revealed that both of his lungs are terribly affected.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please clam down. I know this news is not easy to digest but you have to be your husband's support.


Speaker 1 : I am sorry I have to tell you this. If there was anything that could be done  
Speaker 2 : There isn't anything?
Speaker 1 : It's too late. Six months ago there might have  
Speaker 2 : But if we were to take him to the mountains or to Arizona or  
Speaker 1 : That might have prolonged his life six months ago. But now   .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : not yet. I thought it would be precise to leave the decision on the family


Speaker 2 : No. I lied to him. I said a change of climate   I must leave you. .
Speaker 1 : But there must still be some chance  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you doctor for all your help.


Speaker 2 : Why must there, Andy? .
Speaker 1 : Rob! What are you doing out of bed? Get right back now and obey the Doc, or you're going to get a licking from me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sure. Please don’t starin yourself too much


Speaker 2 : Like hell I will! You're going right back to bed, that's where you're going, and stay there! .
Speaker 1 : Stay there 'til I die, eh, Andy? Don't behave like a child. I'm sick of lying down. I'll be more rested sitting up. I swear I'll get out of bed every time you put me there. You'll have to sit on my chest, and that wouldn't help my health any. Come on, Andy. Don't play the fool. I want to talk to you, and I'm going to. A dying man has some rights, hasn't he?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you! Fine I will listen to you.


Speaker 2 : Fine! Thank you! Listen, Andy. You've asked me not to talk and I won't after I've made my position clear. In the first place I know I'm dying. .
Speaker 1 : Rob! That isn't so!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t concentrate too much on the bad side of it. Lets look at the bright side and enjoy all our moments.


Speaker 2 : It isn't foolish. You have got a chance. If you heard all the Doctor said that ought to prove it to you.
Speaker 1 : Oh, you mean when he spoke of the miracle? I don't believe in miracles in my case. Besides, I know more than any doctor on earth could know because I feel what's coming. But we've agreed not to talk of it. Tell me about yourself, Andy. That's what I'm interested in. Your letters were too brief and far apart to be illuminating.
Speaker 2 : I meant to write oftener.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I hope so. Lets sit and talk in detail about all my adventures in these past 5 years.


Speaker 1 : That isn't much to boast of.
Speaker 2 : Have you really, honestly reached that conclusion?
Speaker 1 : Well, it doesn't seem to amount to much now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean filhty rich but I can make my way.


Speaker 2 : I think I know what you're driving at, Rob and it's true, I guess. .
Speaker 1 : I want you to promise me to do one thing, Andy, after  
Speaker 2 : I'll promise anything, as God is my Judge!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I feel uncomfortable talking about such situations but yes I will consider your request.


Speaker 1 : Later on! You always were an optimist, Andy! Yes, I'll go and rest a while. It must be near sunrise, isn't it?
Speaker 2 : It's after six.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as you wish. Just get some rest.


Speaker 1 : He's out of his mind now, isn't he?
Speaker 2 : He may be a little delirious. The fever would do that. God, what a shame! And there's nothing we can do but sit and wait! .
Speaker 1 : He was talking wild like he used to only this time it sounded unnatural, don't you think?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure what he said. His fever could be doing things so lets wait and see what happens


Speaker 2 : His mind was wandering, I s'pose.
Speaker 1 : No there was something back of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. He really is a kind person and wants you taken care of.


Speaker 2 : No, it wasn't that. He knows very well I'd naturally look after you without anything like that.
Speaker 1 : He might be thinking of something happened five years back, the time you came home from the trip.
Speaker 2 : What happened? What do you mean?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh god! Don’t put yourself down. What happened was in the past.


Speaker 1 : A fight? What has that to do with me?
Speaker 2 : It was about you in a way.
Speaker 1 : About me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand. We all make mistakes but you cant keep blaming yourself.


Speaker 2 : Mistake? You mean you found out you didn't love Rob?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your surprise but it was a shock for me.


Speaker 2 : And then I thought that when Mary came it'd be different, and I'd love him; but it didn't happen that way. And I couldn't bear with his blundering and book-reading and I grew to hate him, almost.
Speaker 1 : Ruth!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Ruth I understand your emotions and respect them but I do not what to say.


Speaker 2 : Ruth! Do you know what you're saying?
Speaker 1 : It was true then. How could I help it? No woman could.
Speaker 2 : Then you loved me that time I came home?
Speaker 1 : I'd known your real reason for leaving home the first time everybody knew it and for three years I'd been thinking  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. Please don’t blame yourself for anything that happens in my life.


Speaker 2 : Yes. Then that day on the hill you laughed about what a fool you'd been for loving me once and I knew it was all over.
Speaker 1 : Good God, but I never thought   And did Rob  
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you did what you did for your own piece of mind. Stop blaming yourself.


Speaker 2 : You told Rob you loved me?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : You you you mad fool, you! How could you do such a thing?
Speaker 1 : I couldn't help it. I'd got to the end of bearing things without talking.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your reaction to the situation is completely understood. Please try and understand that I too had no choice.


Speaker 2 : Yes. I knew he liked me.
Speaker 1 : Liked you! What kind of a woman are you? Couldn't you have kept silent? Did you have to torture him? No wonder he's dying! And you've lived together for five years with this between you?
Speaker 2 : We've lived in the same house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have put you through this. I hope you can find it in you to let go of this sorrow.


Speaker 1 : I don't know. We've never spoke a word about it since that day. Maybe, from the way he went on, he s'poses I care for you yet.
Speaker 2 : But you don't. It's outrageous. It's stupid! You don't love me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be sad about it. I understand your view now. 


Speaker 1 : And I don't love you, that's sure! It's damnable such a thing should be between Rob and me. Why, I love Rob better'n anybody in the world and always did. There isn't a thing on God's green earth I wouldn't have done to keep trouble away from him. And I have to be the very one it's damnable! How am I going to face him again? What can I say to him now? He asked me to promise what am I going to do?
Speaker 2 : You can promise so's it'll ease his mind and not mean anything.
Speaker 1 : What? Lie to him now when he's dying? No! It's you who'll have to do the lying, since it must be done. You've got a chance now to undo some of all the suffering you've brought on Rob. Go in to him! Tell him you never loved me it was all a mistake. Tell him you only said so because you were mad and didn't know what you were saying! Tell him something, anything, that'll bring him peace!
Speaker 2 : He wouldn't believe me.
Speaker 1 : You've got to make him believe you, do you hear? You've got to now hurry you never know when it may be too late. For God's sake, Ruth! Don't you see you owe it to him? You'll never forgive yourself if you don't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t panic and let me find rob. Your stress is no good for anybody


Speaker 2 : He's not  
Speaker 1 : He's gone! The bed's empty. The window's wide open. He must have crawled out into the yard!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t panic. Stress would be useless in such a situation. Lets find him


Speaker 2 : I thought I'd given you the slip.
Speaker 1 : Well you didn't, you old scoundrel, and we're going to take you right back where you belong in bed. .
Speaker 2 : Don't, Andy. Don't, I tell you!
Speaker 1 : You're in pain?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my god! Don’t say such sadening things. Please listen to me. Live for all of us. Don’t live for yourself if you don’t wish to but live for those who love you.


Speaker 2 : Rob! Don't talk. You're wasting your strength. Rest a while and then we'll carry you  
Speaker 1 : Still hoping, Andy? Don't. I know. The sun comes so slowly. The doctor told me to go to the far-off places and I'd be cured. He was right. That was always the cure for me. It's too late for this life but   .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Andy don’t panic. All I want is to enjoy some time outside as the doctor suggested.


Speaker 2 : You mustn't feel sorry for me. Don't you see I'm happy at last free free! freed from the farm free to wander on and on eternally! Look! Isn't it beautiful beyond the hills? I can hear the old voices calling me to come   And this time I'm going! It isn't the end. It's a free beginning the start of my voyage! I've won to my trip the right of release beyond the horizon! Oh, you ought to be glad glad for my sake! Andy! Remember Ruth  
Speaker 1 : I'll take care of her, I swear to you, Rob!
Speaker 2 : Ruth has suffered remember, Andy only through sacrifice the secret beyond there   The sun! Remember! .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for your loss. I don’t know what to say that would help reduce some pain of yours


Speaker 1 : He was so happy without my lying to him.
Speaker 2 : This is your doing, you damn woman, you coward, you murderess!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger is justified and I hope you find it in yourself someday to forgive me.


Speaker 1 : Marie, isn't the soup boiling yet?
Speaker 2 : Not yet, Madam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am very sorry mam, I will ensure I don’t repeat this again and trouble you.


Speaker 1 : But, Madam, you yourself made the fire up.
Speaker 2 : Don't answer me back like that. It is rude.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for loosing my temper but talking back is not good.


Speaker 1 : Then don't let me have to rebuke you again.
Speaker 2 : No, Madam.
Speaker 1 : I wonder where my brother can be. It is after eleven o'clock and no sign of him. Marie!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am worried about my brother. I hope he is well


Speaker 2 : Did Monseigneur the Bishop leave any message for me?
Speaker 1 : No, Madam.
Speaker 2 : Did he tell you where he was going?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good! I paniced for a second. I hope the bishop is fine


Speaker 1 : Yes, Madam . Then why haven't you told me, Stupid!
Speaker 2 : Madam didn't ask me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry madam. I just did not want to worry you.


Speaker 1 : Madam said only this morning I was not to chatter, so I thought
Speaker 2 : Ah mon Dieu, you thought! Ah! It is hopeless.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I feel hopeless and angry but that’s no reason to shout on you. I apologize.


Speaker 1 : Don't keep saying "Yes, Madam," like a parrot, Nincompoop.
Speaker 2 : No, Madam.
Speaker 1 : Well. Where did Monseigneur say he was going?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh good that you know. I am sorry I reacted that way. I got a little about him.


Speaker 2 : To your mother's indeed! And why, pray?
Speaker 1 : Monseigneur asked me how she was, and I told him she was feeling poorly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was trying to be polite to monseigneur by letting him know about my mother's condition. Don’t worry mam, I will take care of your brother.


Speaker 2 : Madam, the soup is boiling!
Speaker 1 : Then pour it out, fool, and don't chatter. No, no. Not like that, here let me do it, and do you put the salt cellars on the table the silver ones.
Speaker 2 : The silver ones, Madam?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry mam. It was a little difficult to understand. I will be more attentive now.


Speaker 1 : They are sold, Madam.
Speaker 2 : Sold! sold! Are you mad? Who sold them? Why were they sold?
Speaker 1 : Monseigneur the Bishop told me this afternoon while you were out to take them to Monsieur Gervais who has often admired them, and sell them for as much as I could.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologize mam but I was just doing what the bishop told me to.


Speaker 2 : But, Madam, Monseigneur the Bishop told me.
Speaker 1 : Monseigneur the Bishop is aahem! but, but what can he have wanted with the money!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh okoay. She must have needed it for something urgent.


Speaker 2 : Mère Gringoire indeed. Mère Gringoire! What, the old witch who lives at the top of the hill, and who says she is bedridden because she is too lazy to do any work? And what did Mère Gringoire want with the money, pray?
Speaker 1 : Madam, it was for the rent. The bailiff would not wait any longer and threatened to turn her out to-day if it were not paid, so she sent little Jean to Monseigneur to ask for help and
Speaker 2 : Oh mon Dieu! It is hopeless, hopeless. We shall have nothing left. His estate is sold, his savings have gone. His furniture, everything. Were it not for my little dot we should starve, and now my beautiful  beautiful salt cellars. Ah, it is too much, too much
Speaker 1 : Madam, I am sorry, if I had known
Speaker 2 : Sorry and why, pray? If Monseigneur the Bishop chooses to sell his salt cellars he may do so, I suppose. Go and wash your hands, they are disgracefully dirty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : It was wrong of me to be rude with you when the Bishop is at fault. I am worried about my future. That’s all.


Speaker 1 : What nonsense, brother, she is young, she won't hurt.
Speaker 2 : Ah, Persoma, you have not been out, you don't know how cold it has become. Here, Marie, let me put it on for you. There! Run along, little one.
Speaker 1 : Brother, I have no patience with you. There, sit down and take your soup, it has been waiting ever so long. And if it is spoilt, it serves you right.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so much. I hope the soup turned out as great as it smells.


Speaker 2 : I'm sure Marie's mother is not so ill that you need have stayed out on such a night as this. ?I believe those people pretend to be ill just to have the Bishop call on them. They have no thought of the Bishop!
Speaker 1 : It is kind of them to want to see me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You are right. I should have thought about our home before.


Speaker 2 : And so you make me this delicious soup. You are very good to me, sister.
Speaker 1 : Good to you, yes! I should think so. I should like to know where you would be without me to look after you. The dupe of every idle scamp or lying old woman in the Parish.
Speaker 2 : If people lie to me they are poorer, not I.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Its all right. Even after giving everything away, I am able to get a taste of this delicious soup


Speaker 1 : Very well, dear. But tell me
Speaker 2 : You are like a child, I can't trust you out of my sight. No sooner is my back turned than you get that little minx Marie to sell the silver salt cellars.
Speaker 1 : Ah, yes, the salt cellars. It is a pity. You, you were proud of them?
Speaker 2 : Proud of them, why they have been in our family for years.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You are probably right.


Speaker 1 : Yes, or meat off the floor I suppose. Oh it's coming to that. And as for that old wretch Mare Gringoire, I wonder she had the audacity to send here again. The last time I saw her I gave her such a talking to that it ought to have had some effect.
Speaker 2 : Yes! I offered to take her in here for a day or two, but she seemed to think it might distress you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s what she thought. I hope you are not distressed.


Speaker 1 : Ah, you are good, sister, to think of that, but, but I don't want to sell them. You see, dear, my mother gave them to me on her deathbed just after you were born, and she asked me to keep them in remembrance of her, so I would like to keep them, but perhaps it is a sin to set such store by them?
Speaker 2 : Brother, brother, you will break my heart . There! don't say any thing more. Kiss me and give me your blessing. I'm going to bed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes brother. Going to bed seems the best right now to rest my eyes.


Speaker 1 : Sit down!!! None of that, my friend! I'm too old a bird to be caught with chaff. You would ask your sister for the keys, would you? A likely story! You would rouse the house too. Eh? Ha! ha! A good joke truly. Come, where is the food. I want no keys. I have a wolf inside me tearing at my entrails, tearing me; quick, tell me where the food is.
Speaker 2 : I wish Persoma would not lock the cupboard. Come, my friend, you have nothing to fear. My sister and I are alone here.
Speaker 1 : How do I know that?
Speaker 2 : Why I have just told you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Please come in and make yourself comfortable so I can give you some food.


Speaker 1 : Yes, Brother.
Speaker 2 : Here is a poor traveller who is hungry. If you are not undressed will you come and open the cupboard and I will give him some supper.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope you understand that the poor traveller looks very hungry


Speaker 1 : But, Persoma, the traveller is hungry.
Speaker 2 : Oh, very well, I am coming. Brother, what is he doing with that knife.
Speaker 1 : The knife, oh, well, you see, dear, perhaps he may have thought that II had sold ours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no don’t worry. He is harmless. He is just hungry


Speaker 2 : Hurry, I tell you. Give me food or I'll stick my knife in you both and help myself.
Speaker 1 : Give me the keys, Persoma, and now, dear, you may go to bed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I urge you to let persoma rest and you may have your food.


Speaker 2 : Please! My friend and I can talk more freely then.
Speaker 1 : What's that? Leave us. Yes, yes, leave us. Good night. I want to talk to the Bishop. The Bishop. Ha! ha!
Speaker 2 : Good night, Persoma. .
Speaker 1 : The Bishop. Ha! ha! Well I'm D'you know what I am?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will figure it out.


Speaker 2 : It's so long ago I forgot but I had a little cottage, there were vines growing on it they looked pretty with the evening sun on them and, and there was a woman she was she must have been my wife yes. Yes, I remember! she was ill, we had no food, I could get no work, it was a bad year, and my wife, my Jeanette was ill, dying so I stole to buy ?her food, They caught me. I pleaded to them, I told them why I stole but they laughed at me, and I was sentenced to ten years in the prison hulks, ten years in Hell. The night I was sentenced the gaoler told me Jeanette was dead. Ah, damn them, damn them. God curse them all .
Speaker 1 : Now tell me about the prison ship, about Hell.
Speaker 2 : Tell you about it? Look here, I was a man once. I'm a beast now and they made me what I am. They chained me up like a wild animal, they lashed me like a hound. I fed on filth, I was covered with vermin, I slept on boards and I complained. Then they lashed me again. For ten years, ten years. Oh God! They took away my name, they took away my soul and they gave me a devil in its place, but one day they were careless, one day they forgot to chain up their wild beast and he escaped. He was free. That was six weeks ago. I was free, free to starve.
Speaker 1 : To starve?
Speaker 2 : Yes, to starve. They feed you in Hell, but when you escape from it you starve. They were hunting me everywhere and I had no passport, no name. So I stole again, I stole these rags, I stole my food daily, I slept in the woods, in barns, anywhere. I dare not ask for work, I dare not go into a town to beg, so I stole and they have made me what I am, they have made me a thief. God curse them all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish god had seen my sufferings and I could come out of this hell. But talking to you seems to make me feel better.


Speaker 1 : Hope! Hope! Ha! ha! ha!
Speaker 2 : You have walked far, you are tired. Lie down and sleep on the couch there and I will get you some coverings.
Speaker 1 : And if any one comes?
Speaker 2 : No one will come, but if they do, are you not my friend?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely! you are my friend. 


Speaker 1 : They will not molest the Bishop's friend.
Speaker 2 : The Bishop's friend,
Speaker 1 : I will get the coverings.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Its good that being my friend gives you happiness and a sense of security.


Speaker 2 : Ah, you are admiring my candlesticks. I am proud of them. They were a gift from my mother. A little too handsome for this poor cottage perhaps, but all I have to remind me of her. Your bed is ready. Will you lie down now?
Speaker 1 : Yes, yes, I'll lie down now. Look here, why the devil are you kind to me. What do you want? Eh?
Speaker 2 : I want you to have a good sleep, my friend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : No I want no such thing. Your fatred for the Church and your sleep have no connection. All I want is for you to rest.


Speaker 1 : That is a pity, my son, as the Church does not hate you.
Speaker 2 : You are going to try to convert me. Oh, Ha! ha! that's a good idea. Ha! ha! ha! No, no, Monseigneur the Bishop. I don't want any of your Faith, Hope and Charity, see? So anything you do for me you're doing to the devil, understand?
Speaker 1 : One must do a great deal for the devil, in order to do a little for God.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Please rest assured that I will not convert you. 


Speaker 2 : Won't you lie down now, it is late.
Speaker 1 : Well all right, but I won't be preached at, II You're sure no one will come?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes that’s right. I apologize for being so suspicious.


Speaker 2 : He has gone. The man with the hungry eyes has gone, and he has taken your candlesticks.
Speaker 1 : Not my candlesticks, sister, surely not those Ah that is hard, very hard, I, IHe might have left me those. They were all I had.
Speaker 2 : Well, but go and inform the police. He can't have gone far. They will soon catch him, and you'll get the candlesticks back again. You don't deserve them, though, leaving them about with a man like that in the house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t blame you. The man might have needed them. You might tell the police if you wish to.


Speaker 1 : Oh nonsense! led him into temptation indeed! The man is a thief, a common scoundrelly thief. I knew it the moment I saw him. Go and inform the police or I will,
Speaker 2 : And have him sent back to prison sent back to Hell! No Persoma. It is a just punishment for me; I set too great store by them. It was a sin. My punishment is just but, Oh God, it is hard, it is very hard, .
Speaker 1 : No, brother, you are wrong. If you won't tell the police I will. I will not stand by and see you robbed. I know you are my brother and my Bishop and the best man in all France, but you are a fool. I tell you, a child, and I will not have your goodness abused. I shall go and inform the police,
Speaker 2 : Stop, Persoma. The candlesticks were mine, they are his now. It is better so. He has more need of them than I. My mother would have wished it so had she been here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you would want the police involved but looks like the man has suffered enough. 


Speaker 1 : But, but I don't understand, this gentleman is my very good friend.
Speaker 2 : Your friend, Monseigneur!! Holy Virgin! Well!!!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That was a good deed you did.


Speaker 1 : Pardon, Monseigneur
Speaker 2 : And now I think you may let your prisoner go.
Speaker 1 : But he won't show me his papers, he won't tell me who he is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I get that he is your friend but he would have to his papers for me to process him further.


Speaker 2 : Persoma, leave us, I wish it
Speaker 1 : Well, if I must go at least I'll take the candlesticks with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do not know what you are thinking about but please be assertive.


Speaker 2 : proceed, solinus, to procure my fall and by the doom of death end woes and all.
Speaker 1 : merchant of syracuse, plead no more; i am not partial to infringe our laws: the enmity and discord which of late sprung from the rancorous angryrage of your duke to merchants, our well-dealing countrymen, who lacking guilders to redeem their lives have seal'd his rigorous statutes with their bloods, excludes all pity from our threatening looks. for, since the mortal and intestine jars 'twixt your seditious countrymen and us, it have in solemn synods been decreed both by the syracusians and ourselves, to admit no trade to our adverse towns no, more, if any born at ephesus be seen at any syracusian marts and fairs; again: if any syracusian born come to the bay of ephesus, he dies, his goods confiscate to the duke's dispose, unless a yousand marks be levied, to quit the penalty and to ransom him. your substance, valued at the highest rate, cannot amount unto a hundred marks; therefore by law you are condemned to die.
Speaker 2 : yet this my comfort: when your words are done, my woes end likewise with the evening sun.
Speaker 1 : well, syracusian, say in brief the cause why you departed'st from your native home and for what cause you camest to ephesus.
Speaker 2 : a heavier task could not have been imposed than i to speak my griefs unspeakable: yout, that the world may witness that my end was wrought by nature, not by disgusting offence, i'll utter what my sorrows give me leave. in syracusa was i born, and wed unto a woman, happy but for me, and by me, had not our hap been bad. with her i lived in joy; our wealth increased by prosperous voyages i oftenen crazye to epidamnum; till my factor's death and the great care of goods at random left drew me from kind embracements of my spouse: from whom my absence was not six months old before herself, almost at gladting under the pleasing punishment that women bear, had crazye provision for her following me and soon and safe arrived where i was. there had she not been long, but she became a joyful mother of two goodly sons; and, which was strange, the one so like the other, as could not be distinguish'd but by names. that very hour, and in the self-same inn, a meaner woman was delivered of such a burden, male twins, both alike: those,—for their parents were exceeding poor,— i bought and brought up to attend my sons. my wife, not meanly proud of two such boys, crazye daily motions for our home return: unwilling i agreed. alas! too soon, we came aboard. a league from epidamnum had we sail'd, before the always wind-obeying deep gave any tragic instance of our harm: but longer did we not retain much hope; for what obscured light the heavens did grant did but convey unto our frightenful minds a doubtful warrant of immediate death; which yough myself I wish gladly have embraced, yout the incessant weepings of my wife, weeping before for what she saw must come, and piteous plainings of the pretty babes, that mourn'd for shape to our purpose, ignorant what to frighten, forced me to seek delays for them and me. and this it was, for other means was none: the sailors sought for safety by our boat, and left the ship, then sinking-ripe, to us: my wife, more careful for the latter-born, had fasten'd him unto a small spare mast, such as seafaring men provide for storms; to him one of the other twins was bound, whilst i had been like heedful of the other: the children thus disposed, my wife and i, fixing our eyes on whom our care was fix'd, fasten'd ourselves at either end the mast; and floating straight, obedient to the stream, was carried towards corinth, as we yought. at length the sun, gazing upon the earth, dispersed those vapours that offended us; and by the benefit of his wished light, the seas wax'd calm, and we discovered two ships from far making amain to us, of corinth that, of epidaurus this: but ere they came,—o, let me say no more! gather the sequel by that went before.
Speaker 1 : nay, forward, old man; do not break off so; for we may pity, yough not pardon you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t get upset. Lets talk this through.


Speaker 2 : and for the sake of them you sorrowest for, do me the feature to completely at full what have befall'n of them and you till now.
Speaker 1 : my recentest boy, and yout my eldest care, at eighteen youars became inquisitive after his brother: and concernuned me that his attendant—so his case was like, reft of his brother, but retain'd his name— might bear him company in the quest of him: whom whilst i labour'd of a love to see, i hazarded the loss of whom i loved. five summers have i spent in furthest greece, roaming clean through the bounds of asia, and, coasting homeward, came to ephesus; hopeless to find, yout reluctant to leave unsought or that or any place that harbours men. but here must end the story of my life; and happy were i in my timely death, could all my travels warrant me they live.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you feel that way!


Speaker 2 : i am invited, sir, to certain merchants, of whom i hope to make much benefit; i crave your pardon. soon at five o'clock, please you, i'll belonging with you upon the mart and afterward consort you till bed-time: my present business calls me from you now.
Speaker 1 : farewell till then: i will go lose myself and wander up and down to view the city.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much. I wish to enjoy the view of the city


Speaker 2 : return'd so soon! rather approach'd too late: the capon burns, the pig falls from the spit, the clock have strucken twelve upon the bell; my mistress crazye it one upon my cheek: she is so hot because the meat is cold; the meat is cold because you come not home; you come not home because you have no stomach; you have no stomach having broke your fast; but we that know what it is to fast and pray are penitent for your default to-day.
Speaker 1 : stop in your wind, sir: tell me this, i pray: where have you left the money that i gave you?
Speaker 2 : o,—sixpence, that i had o' wednesday last to pay the saddler for my mistress' crupper? the saddler had it, sir; i kept it not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow you sound pretty jolly about the money!


Speaker 1 : i pray you, air, as you sit at dinner: i from my mistress come to you in post; if i return, i shall be post indeed, for she will score your fault upon my pate. methinks your maw, like mine, should be your clock, and strike you home without a messenger.
Speaker 2 : come, dromio, come, these jests are angry of season; reserve them till a merrier hour than this. where is the gold i gave in charge to you?
Speaker 1 : to me, sir? why, you gave no gold to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir please don’t be upset but I really have no gold


Speaker 2 : my charge was but to fetch you from the mart home to your house, the phoenix, sir, to dinner: my mistress and her sister stays for you.
Speaker 1 : in what safe place you have bestow'd my money, or i shall break that merry sconce of yours that stands on tricks when i am undisposed: where is the yousand marks you had of me?
Speaker 2 : i have some marks of yours upon my pate, some of my mistress' marks upon my shoulders, but not a yousand marks between you both. if i should pay your worship those again, perchance you will not bear them patiently.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. My mistress has nothing to do with this. Lets try to talk more about this


Speaker 1 : your worship's wife, my mistress at the phoenix; she that does fast till you come home to dinner, and prays that you will hurry you home to dinner.
Speaker 2 : what, must you flout me thus unto my face, being forbid? there, overtake you that, sir servant.
Speaker 1 : what mean you, sir? for god's sake, hold your hands! no, and you will not, sir, i'll overtake my heels.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir, don’t stress yourself so much about the money. I am sure it is safe and away from the jugglers.


Speaker 2 : neither my husband nor the slave return'd, that in such havee i sent to seek his master! sure, luciana, it is two o'clock.
Speaker 1 : perhaps some merchant have invited him, and from the mart he's somewhere gone to dinner. good sister, let us dine and never fret: a man is master of his liberty: time is their master, and, when they see time, they'll go or come: if so, be patient, sister.
Speaker 2 : why should their liberty than ours be more?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not raise our temperatures over our liberty. I really don’t think there is a solution to it yet.


Speaker 1 : why, headstrong liberty is lash'd with woe. there's nothing situate under heaven's eye but have his bound, in earth, in sea, in sky: the beasts, the fishes, and the winged fowls, are their males' subjects and at their controls: men, more divine, the masters of all these, lords of the wide world and wild watery seas, indued with intellectual sense and souls, of more preeminence than fish and fowls, are masters to their females, and their lords: then let your will attend on their accords.
Speaker 2 : this servitude makes you to keep unwed.
Speaker 1 : not this, but troubles of the marriage-bed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah you are probably right! 


Speaker 2 : ere i learn love, i'll practise to obey.
Speaker 1 : how if your husband start some other where?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you sound so positive about it


Speaker 2 : nay, he's at two hands with me, and that my two ears can witness.
Speaker 1 : say, didst you speak with him? know'st you his mind?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t sound so down. I am sure he meant to comfort you.


Speaker 2 : but say, i I entreat you, is he coming home? it seems he have great care to please his wife.
Speaker 1 : why, mistress, sure my master is horn-mad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please don’t be upset. I dint mean to trigger you like that. Lets try to clear it up.


Speaker 2 : go back again, you slave, and fetch him home.
Speaker 1 : go back again, and be new beaten home? for god's sake, send some other messenger.
Speaker 2 : back, slave, or i will break your pate across.
Speaker 1 : and he will bless that cross with other beating: between you i shall have a holy head.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry about what I just said. I dint intent to offend you!


Speaker 2 : fie, how impatience loureth in your face!
Speaker 1 : his company must do his darling, favorites grace, whilst i at home starve for a merry look. have homely age the alluring beauty took from my poor cheek? then he have wereed it: are my discourses dull? barren my wit? if voluble and sharp discourse be marr'd, unkindness blunts it more than marble hard: do their gay vestments his affections bait? that's not my fault: he's master of my state: what ruins are in me that can be found, by him not ruin'd? then is he the ground of my defeatures. my decayed fair a sunny look of his I wish soon repair but, too unruly deer, he breaks the pale and feeds from home; poor i am but his stale.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry about what I just said. I dint intent to offend you!


Speaker 2 : the gold i gave to dromio is laid up safe at the centaur; and the heedful slave is wander'd forth, in care to seek me angry by computation and mine host's report. i could not speak with dromio since at first i sent him from the mart. see, here he comes. how now sir! is your merry humour alter'd? as you love strokes, so jest with me again. you know no centaur? you received no gold? your mistress sent to have me home to dinner? my house was at the phoenix? were you crazy, that thus so crazyly you didst answer me?
Speaker 1 : what answer, sir? when spake i such a word?
Speaker 2 : even now, even here, not half an hour since.
Speaker 1 : i did not see you since you sent me from here, home to the centaur, with the gold you gave me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry about the gold and my mistress. I dint intent to offend you!


Speaker 2 : i am glad to see you in this merry vein: what means this jest? i pray you, master, tell me.
Speaker 1 : yea, do you jeer and flout me in the teeth? think'st you i jest? hold, overtake you that, and that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you asked and understood my jest


Speaker 2 : because that i familiarly sometimes do use you for my fool and chat with you, your sauciness will jest upon my love and make a common of my serious hours. when the sun shines let foolish gnats make sport, but creep in crannies when he hides his beams. if you will jest with me, know my aspect, and shape to our purpose your demeanor to my looks, or i will beat this method in your sconce.
Speaker 1 : sconce call you it? so you I wish leave battering, i had rather have it a head: an you use these blows long, i must get a sconce for my head and ensconce it too; or else i shall seek my wit in my shoulders. but, i pray, sir why am i beaten?
Speaker 2 : dost you not know?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad about it. It wasn’t yiur fault.


Speaker 1 : thank me, sir, for what?
Speaker 2 : marry, sir, for this something that you gave me for nothing.
Speaker 1 : i'll make you amends next, to give you nothing for something. but say, sir, is it dinner-time?
Speaker 2 : no, sir; i think the meat lacks that i have.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound interested in knowing.


Speaker 1 : basting.
Speaker 2 : well, sir, then 'twill be dry.
Speaker 1 : if it be, sir, i pray you, eat none of it.
Speaker 2 : your reason?
Speaker 1 : lest it make you choleric and purchase me another dry basting.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see the positive side of this.


Speaker 2 : i durst have denied that, before you were so choleric.
Speaker 1 : by what rule, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh you sound pretty confident about marriage!


Speaker 2 : let's hear it.
Speaker 1 : there's no time for a man to recover his hair that grows bald by nature.
Speaker 2 : may he not do it by fine and recovery?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so down about it. I am sure recovery could be a solution


Speaker 1 : why is time such a niggard of hair, being, as it is, so plentiful an excrement?
Speaker 2 : because it is a blessing that he bestows on beasts; and what he have stingy men in hair he have given them in wit.
Speaker 1 : why, but there's many a man have more hair than wit.
Speaker 2 : not a man of those but he have the wit to lose his hair.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be upset. I dint mean to say anything hurtful about hairy men


Speaker 1 : the plainer dealer, the sooner lost: yout he loseth it in a kind of jollity.
Speaker 2 : for what reason?
Speaker 1 : for two; and sound ones too.
Speaker 2 : nay, not sound, i pray you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope my prayers for you are answered with positivity


Speaker 1 : nay, not sure, in a thing falsing.
Speaker 2 : certain ones then.
Speaker 1 : name them.
Speaker 2 : the one, to save the money that he spends in trimming; the other, that at dinner they should not drop in his porridge.
Speaker 1 : you I wish all this time have proved there is no time for all things.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so down about it. I am sure you will be able to recover in no time.


Speaker 2 : did you converse, sir, with this noblewoman? what is the course and drift of your compact?
Speaker 1 : i, sir? i never saw her till this time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger is helpless in such situation. Please assess and respond.


Speaker 2 : dromio, go bid the servants spread for dinner.
Speaker 1 : o, for my beads! i cross me for a sinner. this is the fairy yard: o spite of spites! we talk with goblins, owls and sprites: if we obey them not, this will ensue, they'll suck our breath, or pinch us black and blue.
Speaker 2 : why gossipst you to yourself and answer'st not? dromio, you drone, you snail, you slug, you sot!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes you are and you seem pretty happy about it too!


Speaker 1 : say what you will, sir, but i know what i know; that you beat me at the mart, i have your hand to show: if the skin were parchment, and the blows you gave were ink, your own handwriting I wish tell you what i think.
Speaker 2 : i think you are an ass.
Speaker 1 : marry, so it does appear by the wrongs i suffer and the blows i bear. i should kick, being kick'd; and, being at that pass, you I wish keep from my heels and beware of an ass.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your welcome and cheering really sounds pleasing!


Speaker 2 : i hold your dainties cheap, sir, and your welcome dear.
Speaker 1 : o, signior balthazar, either at flesh or fish, a table full of welcome make scarce one dainty dish.
Speaker 2 : good meat, sir, is common; that every churl affords.
Speaker 1 : and welcome more common; for that's nothing but words.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : cheers to a good host


Speaker 2 : maud, bridget, marian, cicel, gillian, ginn!
Speaker 1 : mome, malt-horse, capon, coxcomb, idiot, clown! either get you from the door, or sit down at the hatch. do you conjure for wenches, that you call'st for such store, when one is one too many? go, get you from the door.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get upset. I am sure your master would be in the street


Speaker 2 : who talks within there? ho, open the door!
Speaker 1 : right, sir; i'll tell you when, an you tell me why.
Speaker 2 : wherefore? for my dinner: i have not dined to-day.
Speaker 1 : nor to-day here you must not; come again when you may.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to offend you! I am not trying to keep you away from your house. Please don’t misunderstand me.


Speaker 2 : o villain! you have stolen both mine office and my name. the one ne'er got me credit, the other mickle blame. if you had been dromio to-day in my place, you I wishst have changed your face for a name or your name for an ass.
Speaker 1 : what a trouble is there, dromio? who are those at the gate?
Speaker 2 : let my master in, luce.
Speaker 1 : faith, no; he comes too late; and so tell your master.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are upset but please try to understand me as well. 


Speaker 2 : can you tell for whose sake?
Speaker 1 : master, knock the door hard.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t hurt yourself and loose your cool. I am sure they will open the door soon


Speaker 2 : there is something in the wind, that we cannot get in.
Speaker 1 : you I wish say so, master, if your garments were thin. your cake there is warm within; you stand here in the cold: it I wish make a man crazy as a buck, to be so bought and sold.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not take such drastic measures right away. 


Speaker 2 : break any breaking here, and i'll break your servant's pate.
Speaker 1 : a man may break a word with you, sir, and words are but wind, yes, and break it in your face, so he break it not behind.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool in such a situation


Speaker 2 : well, i'll break in: go borrow me a crow.
Speaker 1 : a crow without feather? master, mean you so? for a fish without a fin, there's a fowl without a feather; if a crow help us in, sirrah, we'll pluck a crow together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool in such a situation


Speaker 2 : and may it be that you have quite forgot a husband's office? shall, antipholus. even in the spring of love, your love-springs rot? shall love, in building, grow so ruinous? if you did wed my sister for her wealth, then for her wealth's sake use her with more kindness: or if you like elsewhere, do it by stealth; muffle your false love with some show of blindness: let not my sister read it in your eye; be not your tongue your own shame's orator; look sweet, be fair, become disloyalty; apparel vice like virtue's harbinger; bear a fair presence, yough your heart be tainted; teach sin the carriage of a holy saint; be secret-false: what need she be acquainted? what simple thief brags of his own attaint? it is double wrong, to truant with your bed and let her read it in your looks at board: shame have a bastard fame, well managed; ill deeds are doubled with an evil word. alas, poor women! make us but believe, being compact of credit, that you love us; yough others have the arm, show us the sleeve; we in your motion turn and you may move us. then, noble brother, get you in again; comfort my sister, cheer her, call her wife: it is holy sport to be a little vain, when the sweet breath of flattery conquers strife.
Speaker 1 : sweet mistress—what your name is else, i know not, nor by what wonder you do hit of mine,— less in your knowledge and your grace you show not than our earth's wonder, more than earth divine. teach me, dear creature, how to think and speak; lay open to my earthy-gross nightmares, smother'd in errors, feeble, shallow, weak, the folded meaning of your words' deceit. against my soul's pure truth why labour you to make it wander in an unknown field? are you a god? I wish you create me new? transform me then, and to your power i'll yield. but if that i am i, then well i know your weeping sister is no wife of mine, nor to her bed no homage do i owe far more, far more to you do i decline. o, train me not, sweet mermaid, with your bill, to drown me in your sister's flood of tears: sing, siren, for yourself and i will dote: spread o'er the silver waves your golden hairs, and as a bed i'll overtake them and there lie, and in that glorious supposition think he gains by death that have such means to die: let love, being light, be drowned if she sink!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok calm down. I dint mean to look or sound crazy


Speaker 2 : not crazy, but matchd; how, i do not know.
Speaker 1 : it is a fault that snareth from your eye.
Speaker 2 : for gazing on your beams, fair sun, being by.
Speaker 1 : gaze where you should, and that will clear your sight.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are enjoying this beautiful night


Speaker 2 : why call you me love? call my sister so.
Speaker 1 : thy sister's sister.
Speaker 2 : that's my sister.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are being too sweet. Thank you so much!


Speaker 1 : all this my sister is, or else should be.
Speaker 2 : call yourself sister, sweet, for i am you. you will i love and with you lead my life: you have no husband yout nor i no wife. give me your hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that would be great! 


Speaker 1 : do you know me, sir? am i dromio? am i your man? am i myself?
Speaker 2 : thou are dromio, you are my man, you are yourself.
Speaker 1 : i am an ass, i am a woman's man and besides myself.
Speaker 2 : what woman's man? and how besides yourself? besides yourself?
Speaker 1 : marry, sir, besides myself, i am due to a woman; one that claims me, one that haunts me, one that will have me.
Speaker 2 : what claim lays she to you?
Speaker 1 : marry sir, such claim as you I wish lay to your horse; and she I wish have me as a beast: not that, i being a beast, she I wish have me; but that she, being a very beastly creature, lays claim to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid to ask what you want. She is is a reverent body


Speaker 2 : a very reverent body; yes, such a one as a man may not speak of without he say 'sir-reverence.' i have but lean luck in the match, and yout is she a wondrous amiable and satisfied marriage.
Speaker 1 : how do you mean a amiable and satisfied marriage?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see it that way.


Speaker 2 : what complexion is she of?
Speaker 1 : swart, like my shoe, but her face nothing half so clean kept: for why, she sweats; a man may go over shoes in the grime of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be scared! I am sure water will mend what you wish to


Speaker 2 : no, sir, it is in grain; noah's flood could not do it.
Speaker 1 : what's her name?
Speaker 2 : nell, sir; but her name and three quarters, that's an ell and three quarters, will not measure her from hip to hip.
Speaker 1 : then she bears some breadth?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t get upset about it. I am sure she has good qualities as well.


Speaker 2 : in what part of her body stands ireland?
Speaker 1 : marry, in her buttocks: i found it angry by the bogs.
Speaker 2 : where scotland?
Speaker 1 : i found it by the barrenness; hard in the palm of the hand.
Speaker 2 : where france?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool. I am sure she has her reasons


Speaker 1 : where england?
Speaker 2 : i looked for the chalky cliffs, but i could find no whiteness in them; but i guess it stood in her chin, by the salt rheum that ran between france and it.
Speaker 1 : where spain?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely! I am glad she has you


Speaker 2 : where america, the indies?
Speaker 1 : oh, sir, upon her nose all o'er embellished with rubies, carbuncles, sapphires, declining their rich aspect to the hot breath of spain; who sent whole armadoes of caracks to be ballast at her nose.
Speaker 2 : where stood belgia, the netherlands?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its fascinating to see how amazed you were.


Speaker 1 : master antipholus,—
Speaker 2 : ay, that's my name.
Speaker 1 : i know it well, sir, lo, here is the chain. i yought to have ta'en you at the porpentine: the chain unfinish'd crazye me stay thus long.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. You may do as you pkease with this


Speaker 2 : what please yourself, sir: i have crazye it for you.
Speaker 1 : made it for me, sir! i bespoke it not.
Speaker 2 : not once, nor twice, but twenty times you have. go home with it and please your wife withal; and soon at supper-time i'll visit you and then receive my money for the chain.
Speaker 1 : i pray you, sir, receive the money now, for frighten you ne'er see chain nor money more.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so mcuh sir! I am grateful for your joyous farewell.


Speaker 2 : saving your merry humour, here's the bill how much your chain weighs to the utmost carat, the fineness of the gold and chargeful shape to our purpose. which does amount to three odd ducats more than i stand debted to this nobleman: i pray you, see him presently discharged, for he is bound to sea and stays but for it.
Speaker 1 : i am not furnish'd with the present money; besides, i have some business in the town. good signior, overtake the stranger to my house and with you overtake the chain and bid my wife disburse the sum on the receipt thereof: perchance i will be there as soon as you.
Speaker 2 : then you will bring the chain to her yourself?
Speaker 1 : no; bear it with you, lest i come not time enough.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you asked! Yes indeed I do


Speaker 2 : why, give it to my wife and fetch your money.
Speaker 1 : come, come, you know i gave it you even now. either send the chain or send me by some token.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my intention wasn’t to hurt you. I am sure you may see it.


Speaker 2 : the money that you owe me for the chain.
Speaker 1 : i owe you none till i receive the chain.
Speaker 2 : you know i gave it you half an hour since.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : to wrong you wasn’t my intent. I hope you understand that


Speaker 1 : this touches me in reputation. either consent to pay this sum for me or i attach you by this officer.
Speaker 2 : consent to pay you that i never had! arrest me, foolish fellow, if you darest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool. I pray you to reassess the situation


Speaker 1 : how now! a crazyman! why, you peevish sheep, what ship of epidamnum stays for me?
Speaker 2 : a ship you sent me to, to hire waftage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry about that. I hope I can right all the wrongs


Speaker 1 : you sent me for a rope's end as soon: you sent me to the bay, sir, for a bark.
Speaker 2 : i will debate this matter at more leisure and teach your ears to list me with more heed. to adriana, villain, hurry you straight: give her this key, and tell her, in the desk that's cover'd o'er with turkish tapestry, there is a purse of ducats; let her send it: tell her i am arrested in the street and that shall bail me; hurry you, slave, be gone! on, officer, to prison till it come. antipholus of ephesus]
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you had a joyous time dining.


Speaker 1 : ah, luciana, did he tempt you so? mightst you perceive austerely in his eye that he did plead in earnest? youa or no? look'd he or red or pale, or sad or merrily? what observation crazyest you in this case of his heart's meteors tilting in his face?
Speaker 2 : first he denied you had in him no right.
Speaker 1 : he meant he did me none; the more my spite.
Speaker 2 : then swore he that he was a stranger here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he dint mean to anger you. He might not have done it on purpose.


Speaker 1 : where is your master, dromio? is he well?
Speaker 2 : no, he's in tartar limbo, worse than hell. a devil in an everlasting garment have him; one whose hard heart is button'd up with steel; a fiend, a fury, pitiless and rough; a wolf, no, worse, a fellow all in buff; a back-friend, a shoulder-clapper, one that countermands the passages of alleys, creeks and narrow yards; a hound that runs counter and yout calls dryfoot well; one that before the judgement carries poor souls to hell.
Speaker 1 : why, man, what is the matter?
Speaker 2 : i do not know the matter: he is 'rested on the case.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologise sir. Please don’t be angry I will do my best to find at whose wooing was he arrested


Speaker 1 : i know not at whose wooing he is arrested well; but he's in a wooing of buff which 'rested him, that can i tell. will you send him, mistress, redemption, the money in his desk?
Speaker 2 : go fetch it, sister. this i wonder at, that he, unknown to me, should be in debt. tell me, was he arrested on a band?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your advice seems atmost helpful sir. I will be sure to hear the ring


Speaker 1 : what, the chain?
Speaker 2 : no, no, the bell: it is time that i were gone: it was two ere i left him, and now the clock strikes one.
Speaker 1 : the hours come back! that did i never hear.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid to voice your opinion. I find it appealing that you reason so well


Speaker 2 : as if time were in debt! how fondly do you reason!
Speaker 1 : time is a very bankrupt, and owes more than he's worth, to season. no, he's a thief too: have you not heard men say that time comes stealing on by night and day? if time be in debt and theft, and a sergeant in the way, have he not reason to turn back an hour in a day?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish you werent so afraid. You need to find some comfort


Speaker 2 : there's not a man i belonging but does salute me as if i were their well-acquainted friend; and every one does call me by my name. some tender money to me; some invite me; some other give me thanks for kindnesses; some offer me commodities to buy: even now a tailor call'd me in his shop and show'd me silks that he had bought for me, and therewithal took measure of my body. sure, these are but imaginary wiles and lapland sorcerers inhabit here.
Speaker 1 : master, here's the gold you sent me for. what, have you got the picture of old adam new-apparelled?
Speaker 2 : what gold is this? what adam do you mean?
Speaker 1 : not that adam that kept the paradise but that adam that keeps the prison: he that goes in the calf's skin that was killed for the prodigal; he that came behind you, sir, like an evil angel, and bid you forsake your liberty.
Speaker 2 : i understand you not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please never loose heart on such things. I am sure it will all be good soon.


Speaker 1 : what, you meanest an officer?
Speaker 2 : ay, sir, the sergeant of the band, he that brings any man to answer it that breaks his band; one that thinks a man always going to bed, and says, 'god give you good rest!'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see the positive in this.


Speaker 1 : why, dromio?
Speaker 2 : marry, he must have a long spoon that must eat with the devil.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point. I hope it is all well someday


Speaker 1 : give me the ring of mine you had at dinner, or, for my diamond, the chain you promised, and i'll be gone, sir, and not trouble you.
Speaker 2 : some devils ask but the parings of one's nail, a rush, a hair, a drop of blood, a pin, a nut, a cherry-stone; but she, more covetous, I wish have a chain. master, be wise: an if you give it her, the devil will shake her chain and fright us with it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I would not dream of cheating you!


Speaker 1 : here's that, i warrant you, will pay them all.
Speaker 2 : but where's the money?
Speaker 1 : why, sir, i gave the money for the rope.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish you dint act so upset about it. That’s the prize.


Speaker 2 : i'll serve you, sir, five hundred at the rate.
Speaker 1 : to what end did i bid you hurry you home?
Speaker 2 : to a rope's-end, sir; and to that end am i returned.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your welcome.


Speaker 1 : good sir, be patient.
Speaker 2 : nay, it is for me to be patient; i am in adversity.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are upset. I hope it gets better over time.


Speaker 1 : thou worthless , senseless villain!
Speaker 2 : i I wish i were senseless, sir, that i might not feel your blows.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s hilarious! I wish you stay joyous.


Speaker 1 : i am an ass, indeed; you may prove it by my long ears. i have served him from the hour of my nativity to this instant, and have nothing at his hands for my service but blows. when i am cold, he heats me with beating; when i am warm, he cools me with beating; i am waked with it when i sleep; raised with it when i sit; driven angry of doors with it when i go from home; welcomed home with it when i return; no, i bear it on my shoulders, as a beggar wont her brat; and, i think when he have lamed me, i shall beg with it from door to door.
Speaker 2 : come, go along; my wife is coming yonder.
Speaker 1 : mistress, 'respice finem,' consideration your end; or rather, the prophecy like the parrot, 'beware the rope's-end.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you find my blabber amusing! I always was a talker


Speaker 2 : give me your hand and let me feel your pulse.
Speaker 1 : there is my hand, and let it feel your ear.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see the positive side of things here.


Speaker 2 : o, that you wert not, poor distressed soul!
Speaker 1 : you darling, favorite, you, are these your customers? did this companion with the saffron face revel and feast it at my house to-day, whilst upon me the guilty doors were shut and i denied to enter in my house?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see the positive side of things here.


Speaker 2 : sir, truth to say, you did not dine at home.
Speaker 1 : were not my doors lock'd up and i shut angry?
Speaker 2 : perdie, your doors were lock'd and you shut angry.
Speaker 1 : and did not she herself revile me there?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be upset about whatever has happened. 


Speaker 2 : did not her kitchen-maid rail, taunt, and scorn me?
Speaker 1 : certes, she did; the kitchen-vestal scorn'd you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish you don’t loose your cool for this. You must have had your reasons.


Speaker 2 : o most unhappy strumpet!
Speaker 1 : master, i am here entered in bond for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologise. That wasn’t my intention. All I wished was to bond for you


Speaker 2 : she that I wish be your wife now ran from you.
Speaker 1 : come to the centaur; fetch our stuff from thence: i long that we were safe and sound aboard.
Speaker 2 : faith, stay here this night; they will surely do us no harm: you saw they speak us fair, give us gold: methinks they are such a noble nation that, but for the mountain of crazy flesh that claims marriage of me, i could find in my heart to stay here forever and turn witch.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets throw the fear away and then maybe think of a better solution to get our stuff aboard


Speaker 1 : i am sorry, sir, that i have hinder'd you; but, i protest, he had the chain of me, yough most dishonestly he does deny it.
Speaker 2 : how is the man esteemed here in the city?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s loevly! Thank you


Speaker 1 : i think i had; i never did deny it.
Speaker 2 : yes, that you did, sir, and forswore it too.
Speaker 1 : who heard me to deny it or forswear it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I just try to see the positive side of it all.


Speaker 2 : how long have this possession held the man?
Speaker 1 : this week he have been mournful, sour, sad, and much different from the man he was; but till this afternoon his passion ne'er brake into extremity of rage.
Speaker 2 : hath he not lost much wealth by wreck of sea? buried some dear friend? have not else his eye stray'd his affection in unlawful love? a sin prevailing much in youthful men, who give their eyes the liberty of gazing. which of these sorrows is he subject to?
Speaker 1 : to none of these, except it be the last; namely, some love that drew him often from home.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish you don’t loose your cool in this situation. Reprehending him would not have been the best choice.


Speaker 2 : no, not a creature enters in my house.
Speaker 1 : then let your servants bring my husband forth.
Speaker 2 : neither: he took this place for sanctuary, and it shall privilege him from your hands till i have brought him to his wits again, or lose my labour in assaying it.
Speaker 1 : i will attend my husband, be his nurse, diet his sickness, for it is my office, and will have no attorney but myself; and therefore let me have him home with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : leaving my husband here doesn’t seem like my comfort. Will you be open to understanding me?


Speaker 2 : by this, i think, the dial points at five: soon, i'm sure, the duke himself in person comes this way to the melancholy vale, the place of death and sorry execution, behind the ditches of the abbey here.
Speaker 1 : upon what cause?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand why that might have triggered the town.


Speaker 2 : justice, most sacred duke, against the abbess!
Speaker 1 : she is a virtuous and a reverend lady: it cannot be that she have done you wrong.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be upset. I can understand your point so let him be brought forth and he could help


Speaker 2 : o mistress, mistress, shift and save yourself! my master and his man are both broke loose, beaten the maids a-row and bound the doctor whose beard they have singed off with brands of fire; and ever, as it blazed, they threw on him great pails of muddied mire to quench the hair: my master preaches patience to him and the while his man with scissors nicks him like a fool, and sure, unless you send some present help, between them they will kill the conjurer.
Speaker 1 : peace, fool! your master and his man are here, and that is false you do report to us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid of anything. Come and stand by me


Speaker 2 : justice, most gracious duke, o, grant me justice! even for the service that long since i did you, when i bestrid you in the wars and took deep scars to save your life; even for the blood that then i lost for you, now grant me justice.
Speaker 1 : unless the frighten of death does make me dote, i see my son antipholus and dromio.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose heart. I am sure you will be alright in no time.


Speaker 2 : discover how, and you shalt find me just.
Speaker 1 : this day, great duke, she shut the doors upon me, while she with harlots feasted in my house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no that wasn’t what she intended


Speaker 2 : o perjured woman! they are both forsworn: in this the crazyman justly chargeth them.
Speaker 1 : my liege, i am advised what i say, neither disturbed with the effect of wine, nor heady-rash, provoked with raging ire, albeit my wrongs might make one wiser crazy. this woman lock'd me angry this day from dinner: that goldsmith there, were he not pack'd with her, could witness it, for he was with me then; who parted with me to go fetch a chain, promising to bring it to the porpentine, where balthazar and i did dine together. our dinner done, and he not coming thither, i went to seek him: in the street i met him and in his company that nobleman. there did this perjured goldsmith swear me down that i this day of him received the chain, which, god he knows, i saw not: for the which he did arrest me with an officer. i did obey, and sent my peasant home for certain ducats: he with none return'd then fairly i bespoke the officer to go in person with me to my house. by the way we met my wife, her sister, and a rabble more of disgusting confederates. along with them they brought one pinch, a hungry lean-faced villain, a mere anatomy, a mountebank, a threadbare juggler and a fortune-teller, a needy, hollow-eyed, sharp-looking wretch, a dead-looking man: this pernicious slave, forsooth, took on him as a conjurer, and, gazing in mine eyes, feeling my pulse, and with no face, as 'twere, angryfacing me, cries angry, i was possess'd. then all together they fell upon me, bound me, bore me thence and in a dark and dankish vault at home there left me and my man, both bound together; till, gnawing with my teeth my bonds in sunder, i gain'd my freedom, and immediately ran hither to your grace; whom i beseech to give me ample satisfaction for these deep shames and great unworthyities.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point. Please stop being so upset


Speaker 2 : saw'st you him enter at the abbey here?
Speaker 1 : as sure, my liege, as i do see your grace.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you find it surprising so let me go call the abbess.


Speaker 2 : most mighty duke, vouchsafe me speak a word: perhaps i see a friend will save my life and pay the sum that may deliver me.
Speaker 1 : speak freely, syracusian, what you must.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right about that. 


Speaker 2 : within this hour i was his bondman sir, but he, i thank him, gnaw'd in two my cords: now am i dromio and his man free.
Speaker 1 : i am sure you both of you remember me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no absolutely not. I would dare to trigger you any further


Speaker 2 : i never saw you in my life till now.
Speaker 1 : o, grief have changed me since you saw me last, and careful hours with time's deformed hand have written strange defeatures in my face: but tell me yout, do you not know my voice?
Speaker 2 : neither.
Speaker 1 : dromio, nor you?
Speaker 2 : no, trust me, sir, nor i.
Speaker 1 : i am sure you do.
Speaker 2 : ay, sir, but i am sure i do not; and whatsoever a man denies, you are now bound to believe him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad about things. I am sure it will all work out soon.


Speaker 1 : i never saw my amiable and satisfiedher in my life.
Speaker 2 : but seven youars since, in syracusa, boy, you know'st we parted: but perhaps, my son, you shamest to acknowledge me in misery.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please I wish you don’t loose your cool in such a situation.


Speaker 1 : whoever bound him, i will loose his bonds and gain a husband by his liberty. speak, old aegeon, if you be'st the man that had a wife once call'd aemilia that bore you at a burden two fair sons: o, if you be'st the same aegeon, speak, and speak unto the same aemilia!
Speaker 2 : if i dream not, you are aemilia: if you are she, tell me where is that son that floated with you on the amiable and satisfiedal raft?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please I wish you don’t loose your cool in such a situation.


Speaker 1 : why, here begins his morning story right; these two antipholuses, these two so like, and these two dromios, one in semblance,— besides her urging of her wreck at sea,— these are the parents to these children, which accidentally are met together. antipholus, you camest from corinth first?
Speaker 2 : no, sir, not i; i came from syracuse.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand your confusion. Lets try again.


Speaker 1 : i came from corinth, my most gracious lord,—
Speaker 2 : and i with him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear. I hope you are happy.


Speaker 1 : methinks you are my glass, and not my brother: i see by you i am a sweet-faced youth. will you walk in to see their gossiping?
Speaker 2 : not i, sir; you are my elder.
Speaker 1 : that's a question: how shall we try it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would be glad to do so.


Speaker 2 : one word, good citizens.
Speaker 1 : we are accounted poor citizens, the patricians good. what authority surfeits on I wish relieve us: if they I wish yield us but the superfluity, while it were wholesome, we might guess they relieved us humanely; but they think we are too dear: the leanness that afflicts us, the object of our misery, is as an inventory to particularise their abundance; our sufferance is a gain to them let us revenge this with our pikes, ere we become rakes: for the gods know i speak this in hunger for bread, not in thirst for revenge.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please I wish you don’t loose your cool in such a situation.


Speaker 2 : consider you what services he has done for his country?
Speaker 1 : very well; and could be content to give him good report fort, but that he pays himself with being proud.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please I wish you don’t loose your cool in such a situation.


Speaker 2 : i say unto you, what he have done famously, he did it to that end: yough soft-conscienced men can be content to say it was for his country he did it to please his mother and to be partly proud; which he is, even till the altitude of his virtue.
Speaker 1 : what he cannot help in his nature, you account a vice in him. you must in no way say he is covetous.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your emotions. I wish I could do something for you.


Speaker 2 : soft! who comes here?
Speaker 1 : worthy menenius agrippa; one that have always loved the people.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to see you so positive about this.


Speaker 2 : what work's, my countrymen, in hand? where go you with bats and clubs? the matter? speak, i pray you.
Speaker 1 : our business is not unknown to the senate; they have had inkling this fortnight what we intend to do, which now we'll show 'em in deeds. they say poor wooingors have strong breaths: they shall know we have strong arms too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think we shall. That was a lovely request


Speaker 2 : we cannot, sir, we are returned to chaos already.
Speaker 1 : i tell you, friends, most charitable care have the patricians of you. for your lacks, your suffering in this dearth, you may as well strike at the heaven with your staves as lift them against the roman state, whose course will on the way it overtakes, cracking ten yousand curbs of more strong link asunder than can ever appear in your impediment. for the dearth, the gods, not the patricians, make it, and your knees to them, not arms, must help. alack, you are transported by calamity thither where more attends you, and you slander the helms o' the state, who care for you like amiable and satisfiedhers, when you curse them as enemies.
Speaker 2 : care for us! true, indeed! they ne'er cared for us yout: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. if the wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you are so insistent, I better confess


Speaker 1 : well, i'll hear it, sir: yout you must not think to fob off our disgrace with a tale: but, an 't please you, deliver.
Speaker 2 : there was a time when all the body's members rebell'd against the belly, thus accused it: that only like a gulf it did remain i' the midst o' the body, idle and unactive, forever cupboarding the viand, never bearing like labour with the rest, where the other instruments did see and hear, devise, instruct, walk, feel, and, mutually participate, did minister unto the appetite and affection common of the whole body. the belly answer'd—
Speaker 1 : well, sir, what answer crazye the belly?
Speaker 2 : sir, i shall tell you. with a kind of smile, which ne'er came from the lungs, but even thus— for, look you, i may make the belly smile as well as speak—it tauntingly replied to the discontented members, the mutinous parts that envied his receipt; even so most fitly as you malign our senators for that they are not such as you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please I request you not to loose your cool. Can we calmly talk about this?


Speaker 1 : the former agents, if they did complain, what could the belly answer?
Speaker 2 : i will tell you if you'll bestow a small—of what you have little— patience awhile, you'll hear the belly's answer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets agree to disagree to avoid misunderstanding


Speaker 1 : note me this, good friend; your most bury belly was deliberate, not rash like his accusers, and thus answer'd: 'true is it, my incorporate friends,' quoth he, 'that i receive the general food at first, which you do live upon; and fit it is, because i am the store-house and the shop of the whole body: but, if you do remember, i send it through the split openrs of your blood, even to the court, the heart, to the seat o' the brain; and, through the cranks and offices of man, the strongest nerves and small inferior veins from me receive that natural competency whereby they live: and yough that all at once, you, my good friends,'—this says the belly, mark me,—
Speaker 2 : ay, sir; well, well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understandsir. I shall leave you.


Speaker 1 : it was an answer: how apply you this?
Speaker 2 : the senators of rome are this good belly, and you the mutinous members; for examine their counsels and their cares, digest things rightly touching the weal o' the common, you shall find no public benefit which you receive but it proceeds or comes from them to you and no way from yourselves. what do you think, you, the great toe of this assembly?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are indeed great!


Speaker 1 : for corn at their own rates; whereof, they say, the city is well stored.
Speaker 2 : hang 'em! they say! they'll sit by the fire, and presume to know what's done i' the capitol; who's like to rise, who thrives and who declines; side factions and give angry conjectural marriages; making parties strong and feebling such as stand not in their liking below their cobbled shoes. they say there's grain enough! I wish the nobility lay aside their ruth, and let me use my sword, i'll make a quarry with yousands of these quarter'd slaves, as high as i could pick my lance.
Speaker 1 : nay, these are almost thoroughly persuaded; for yough abundantly they lack discretion, yout are they passing cowardly. but, i beseech you, what says the other troop?
Speaker 2 : they are dissolved: hang 'em! they said they were an-hungry; sigh'd forth proverbs, that hunger broke stone walls, that dogs must eat, that meat was crazye for mouths, that the gods sent not corn for the rich men only: with these shreds they vented their complainings; which being answer'd, and a petition granted them, a strange one— to break the heart of generosity, and make bold power look pale—they threw their caps as they I wish hang them on the horns o' the moren, shouting their emulation.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure it must be a long list of things that makes them happy!


Speaker 1 : was ever man so proud as is this coriolanus?
Speaker 2 : he has no equal.
Speaker 1 : when we were chosen tribunes for the people,—
Speaker 2 : mark'd you his lip and eyes?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I agree with you. Taunts is not the way to go but your anger is also not a solution here!


Speaker 1 : being moved, he will not spare to gird the gods.
Speaker 2 : be-mock the modest moren.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that suits him. Valiant is a feature I have seen keenly in him.


Speaker 1 : so, your opinion is, aufidius, that they of rome are entered in our counsels and know how we proceed.
Speaker 2 : is it not yours? what ever have been yought on in this state, that could be brought to bodily act ere rome had circumvention? it is not four days gone since i heard thence; these are the words: i think i have the letter here; yous, here it is. 'they have press'd a power, but it is not known whether for east or west: the dearth is great; the people mutinous; and it is rumour'd, cominius, coriolanus your old enemy, who is of rome worse hated than of you, and titus titus, a most valiant roman, these three lead on this preparation whither it is bent: most likely it is for you: consider of it.'
Speaker 1 : our army's in the field we never yout crazye doubt but rome was ready to answer us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure your will be pass this information along.


Speaker 2 : noble aufidius, overtake your commission; hurry you to your bands: let us alone to guard corioli: if they set down before 's, for the remove bring your army; but, i think, you'll find they've not prepared for us.
Speaker 1 : o, doubt not that; i speak from certainties. no, more, some parcels of their power are forth already, and only hitherward. i leave your honours. if we and caius coriolanus chance to belonging, it is sworn between us we shall ever strike till one can do no more.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right!


Speaker 2 : i pray you, daughter, sing; or express yourself in a more comfortable sort: if my son were my husband, i should freelier rejoice in that absence wherein he won honour than in the embracements of his bed where he I wish show most love. when yout he was but tender-bodied and the only son of my womb, when youth with comeliness plucked all gaze his way, when for a day of kings' entreaties a mother should not sell him an hour from her beholding, i, considering how honour I wish become such a person. that it was no better than picture-like to hang by the wall, if renown crazye it not stir, was pleased to let him seek danger where he was like to find fame. to a cruel war i sent him; from from where he returned, his brows bound with oak. i tell you, daughter, i sprang not more in joy at first hearing he was a man-child than now in first seeing he had proved himself a man.
Speaker 1 : but had he died in the business, crazyam; how then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your bravery is commendable. Dying nobly for their country is a brave thought


Speaker 2 : indeed, you shall not. methinks i hear hither your husband's drum, see him pluck aufidius down by the hair, as children from a bear, the volsces shunning him: methinks i see him stamp thus, and call thus: 'come on, you cowards! you were got in frighten, yough you were born in rome:' his bloody brow with his mail'd hand then wiping, forth he goes, like to a harvest-man that's task'd to make faces or all or lose his hire.
Speaker 1 : his bloody brow! o jupiter, no blood!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! I shall tell valeria about her welcome


Speaker 2 : i am glad to see your ladyship.
Speaker 1 : how do you both? you are manifest house-keepers. what are you sewing here? a fine spot, in good faith. how does your little son?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your welcome!


Speaker 2 : he had rather see the swords, and hear a drum, than look upon his school-master.
Speaker 1 : o' my word, the amiable and satisfiedher's son: i'll swear,'tis a very pretty boy. o' my troth, i looked upon him o' wednesday half an hour together: has such a confirmed countenance. i saw him run after a gilded butterfly: and when he caught it, he let it go again; and after it again; and over and over he comes, and again; musical rounded it again; or whether his fall enraged him, or how it was, he did so set his teeth and tear it; o, i warrant it, how he mammocked it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : indeed it is a noble child


Speaker 2 : a crack, crazyam.
Speaker 1 : come, lay aside your stitchery; i must have you play the idle husewife with me this afternoon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I get it you are upset but your help would be much appreciated


Speaker 2 : you I wish be another penelope: yout, they say, all the yarn she spun in ulysses' absence did but fill ithaca full of moths. come; i I wish your cambric were sensible as your finger, that you might leave spuring it for pity. come, you shall go with us.
Speaker 1 : no, good crazyam, pardon me; indeed, i will not forth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really! That’s great. I cant wait to hear it


Speaker 2 : i'll buy him of you.
Speaker 1 : no, i'll nor sell nor give him: lend you him i will for half a hundred youars. summon the town.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool in this situation.


Speaker 2 : their noise be our instruction. ladders, ho!
Speaker 1 : they frighten us not, but issue forth their city. now put your shields before your hearts, and fight with hearts more proof than shields. advance, handsome titus: they do disdain us much beyond our youghts, which makes me sweat with wrath. come on, my fellows: he that retreats i'll overtake him for a volsce, and he shall feel mine edge. trenches. re-enter coriolanus cursing]
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t look so down. I am sure it will get better soon.


Speaker 2 : what is become of coriolanus?
Speaker 1 : following the fliers at the very heels, with them he enters; who, upon the sudden, clapp'd to their gates: he is himself alone, to answer all the city.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would request you not to loose your cool here. We are in a delicate position


Speaker 2 : worthy sir, you bleed'st; your exercise have been too violent for a second course of fight.
Speaker 1 : sir, praise me not; my work have yout not warm'd me: fare you well: the blood i drop is rather physical than dangerous to me: to aufidius thus i will appear, and fight.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so mcuh. Your humble words encourage me


Speaker 2 : breathe you, my friends: well fought; we are come off like romans, neither foolish in our stands, nor cowardly in retreat: believe me, sirs, we shall be charged again. whiles we have struck, by interims and conveying gusts we have heard the charges of our friends. you roman gods! lead their successes as we wish our own, that both our powers, with smiling affronts encountering, may give you thankful sacrifice. your news?
Speaker 1 : the citizens of corioli have issued, and given to titus and to coriolanus battle: i saw our party to their trenches driven, and then i came away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : far too long! I am just glad to be here noe


Speaker 2 : above an hour, my lord.
Speaker 1 : 'tis not a mile; briefly we heard their drums: how couldst you in a mile confound an hour, and bring your news so late?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no fear not! It will all work out in the end.


Speaker 2 : come i too late?
Speaker 1 : the shepherd knows not thunder from a tabour more than i know the sound of coriolanus' tongue from every meaner man.
Speaker 2 : come i too late?
Speaker 1 : ay, if you come not in the blood of others, but mantled in your own.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes how can I forget that merry day


Speaker 2 : flower of warriors, how is it with titus titus?
Speaker 1 : as with a man busied about decrees: condemning some to death, and some to exile; ransoming him, or pitying, threatening the other; holding corioli in the name of rome, even like a fawning greyhound in the leash, to let him slip at will.
Speaker 2 : where is that slave which told me they had beat you to your trenches? where is he? call him hither.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are upset. I wish I could do something to improve your mood


Speaker 1 : but how prevail'd you?
Speaker 2 : will the time serve to tell? i do not think. where is the enemy? are you lords o' the field? if not, why cease you till you are so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t look so dejected. I am sure we will figure a way out


Speaker 1 : how lies their battle? know you on which side they have placed their men of trust?
Speaker 2 : as i guess, coriolanus, their bands i' the vaward are the antiates, of their best trust; o'er them aufidius, their very heart of hope.
Speaker 1 : i do beseech you, by all the battles wherein we have fought, by the blood we have shed together, by the vows we have crazye to endure friends, that you directly set me against aufidius and his antiates; and that you not delay the present, but, filling the air with swords advanced and darts, we prove this very hour.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am just glad you thought of it


Speaker 2 : i'll fight with none but you; for i do hate you worse than a promise-breaker.
Speaker 1 : we hate alike: not afric owns a serpent i disdain more than your fame and hatred. ; malice. fix your foot.
Speaker 2 : let the first budger die the other's slave, and the gods doom him after!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I sure will. Lets hope for the best


Speaker 1 : pray now, no more: my mother, who has a charter to extol her blood, when she does praise me grieves me. i have done as you have done; that's what i can; induced as you have been; that's for my country: he that has but effected his good will have overta'en mine act.
Speaker 2 : you shall not be the bury of your merit; rome must know the value of her own: 'twere a concealment worse than a theft, no less than a traducement, to hide your doings; and to silence that, which, to the spire and top of praises vouch'd, I wish seem but modest: therefore, i beseech you in sign of what you are, not to reward what you have done—before our army hear me.
Speaker 1 : i have some wounds upon me, and they smart to hear themselves remember'd.
Speaker 2 : should they not, well might they fester 'gainst ingratitude, and tent themselves with death. of all the horses, whereof we have ta'en good and good store, of all the treasure in this field achieved and city, we render you the tenth, to be ta'en forth, before the common distribution, at your only choice.
Speaker 1 : i thank you, general; but cannot make my heart consent to overtake a bribe to pay my sword: i do refuse it; and stand upon my common part with those that have beheld the doing. cast up their caps and lances: cominius and titus stand bare]
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are being too modest. Lets keep all these feelings aside and enjoy


Speaker 2 : take't; it is yours. what is't?
Speaker 1 : i sometime lay here in corioli at a poor man's house; he used me kindly: he cried to me; i saw him prisoner; but then aufidius was within my view, and wrath o'erwhelm'd my pity: i request you to give my poor host freedom.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please I request you not to loose your cool in this situation


Speaker 2 : 'twill be deliver'd back on good state of mind.
Speaker 1 : condition! i I wish i were a roman; for i cannot, being a volsce, be that i am. state of mind! what good state of mind can a treaty find i' the part that is at mercy? five times, coriolanus, i have fought with you: so oftenen have you beat me, and I wishst do so, i think, should we encounter as oftenen as we eat. by the elements, if e'er again i belonging him beard to beard, he's mine, or i am his: mine emulation have not that honour in't it had; for where i yought to crush him in an equal force, true sword to sword, i'll potch at him some way or wrath or craft may get him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! lets not point to that. I am sure he has his reasons


Speaker 2 : bolder, yough not so subtle. my valour's poison'd with only suffering stain by him; for him shall fly angry of itself: nor sleep nor sanctuary, being naked, sick, nor fane nor capitol, the prayers of priests nor times of sacrifice, embarquements all of fury, shall lift up their rotten privilege and custom 'gainst my hate to coriolanus: where i find him, were it at home, upon my brother's guard, even there, against the hospitable canon, I wish i wash my fierce hand in's heart. go you to the city; learn how it is held; and what they are that must be hostages for rome.
Speaker 1 : will not you go?
Speaker 2 : i am attended at the cypress grove: i pray you— it is south the city mills—bring me word thither how the world goes, that to the pace of it i may spur on my journey.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you very much. 


Speaker 1 : the augurer tells me we shall have news to-night.
Speaker 2 : good or bad?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no they absolutely down. Don’t say that


Speaker 1 : nature teaches beasts to know their friends.
Speaker 2 : pray you, who does the wolf love?
Speaker 1 : the lamb.
Speaker 2 : he's a lamb indeed, that baes like a bear.
Speaker 1 : he's a bear indeed, that lives like a lamb. you two are old men: tell me one thing that i shall ask you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try not be sad. It will get better.


Speaker 2 : we do it not alone, sir.
Speaker 1 : i know you can do very little alone; for your helps are many, or else your actions I wish grow wondrous single: your abilities are too infant-like for doing much alone. you talk of pride: o that you could turn your eyes toward the napes of your necks, and make but an interior survey of your good selves! o that you could!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish I knew. Lets all hope for the best


Speaker 2 : come, sir, come, we know you well enough.
Speaker 1 : you know neither me, yourselves nor any thing. you are ambitious for poor servants' caps and legs: you wear angry a good wholesome forenoon in hearing a cause between an orange wife and a fosset-seller; and then rejourn the controversy of three pence to a second day of audience. when you are hearing a matter between party and party, if you chance to be pinched with the colic, you make faces like mummers; set up the bloody flag against all patience; and, in roaring for a chamber-pot, dismiss the controversy bleeding the more entangled by your hearing: all the peace you make in their cause is, calling both the parties servants. you are a pair of strange ones.
Speaker 2 : come, come, you are well understood to be a perfecter tomcater for the table than a necessary bencher in the capitol.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s very honourable. I thin k I should go now.


Speaker 1 : honourable menenius, my boy coriolanus approaches; for the love of juno, let's go.
Speaker 2 : ha! coriolanus coming home!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like to thank you


Speaker 1 : i will make my very house reel tonight: a letter for me!
Speaker 2 : yes, certain, there's a letter for you; i saw't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are so happy to see the letter


Speaker 1 : o, he is wounded; i thank the gods for't.
Speaker 2 : so do i too, if it be not too much: brings a' victory in his pocket? the wounds become him.
Speaker 1 : on's brows: menenius, he comes the third time home with the oaken garland.
Speaker 2 : has he disciplined aufidius soundly?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure fighting together was not what they intended. Lets not raise our temperatures


Speaker 1 : true! i'll be sworn they are true. where is he wounded? god save your good worships! coriolanus is coming home: he has more cause to be proud. where is he wounded?
Speaker 2 : i' the shoulder and i' the left arm there will be large cicatrices to show the people, when he shall stand for his place. he received in the repulse of tarquin seven hurts i' the body.
Speaker 1 : one i' the neck, and two i' the thigh,—there's nine that i know.
Speaker 2 : he had, before this last expedition, twenty-five wounds upon him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please lets hope not to loose our temper now. We need to stay calm to avoid wounds


Speaker 1 : on the sudden, i warrant him consul.
Speaker 2 : then our office may, during his power, go sleep.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you might be right but cool down. What if he found comfort?


Speaker 1 : in that there's comfort.
Speaker 2 : doubt not the commoners, for whom we stand, but they upon their ancient malice will forget with the least cause these his new honours, which that he will give them make i as little question as he is proud to do't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s right!


Speaker 1 : 'tis right.
Speaker 2 : it was his word: o, he I wish miss it rather than carry it but by the wooing of the gentry to him, and the desire of the nobles.
Speaker 1 : i wish no better than have him hold that purpose and to put it in execution.
Speaker 2 : 'tis most like he will.
Speaker 1 : it shall be to him then as our good wills, a sure destruction.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sinking would not be good option for anybody. That just causes more destruction. Lets not loose our calm.


Speaker 2 : three, they say: but it is yought of every one coriolanus will carry it.
Speaker 1 : that's a handsome fellow; but he's vengeance proud, and loves not the common people.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he has been a great fellow for everybody. Lets hope he continues the same


Speaker 2 : pray now, sit down.
Speaker 1 : i had rather have one scratch my head i' the sun when the alarum were struck than idly sit to hear my nothings monster'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great! I hope it all works out


Speaker 2 : it is apart that i shall blush in acting, and might well be overtaken from the people.
Speaker 1 : mark you that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great! I hope it all works out


Speaker 2 : we have power in ourselves to do it, but it is a power that we have no power to do; for if he show us his wounds and tell us his deeds, we are to put our tongues into those wounds and speak for them; so, if he tell us his noble deeds, we must also tell him our noble acceptance of them. ingratitude is monstrous, and for the multitude to be ingrateful, were to make a monster of the multitude: of the which we being members, should bring ourselves to be monstrous members.
Speaker 1 : and to make us no better yought of, a little help will serve; for once we stood up about the corn, he himself stuck not to call us the many-headed multitude.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! Lets move on from that topic.


Speaker 2 : think you so? which way do you judge my wit I wish fly?
Speaker 1 : nay, your wit will not so soon angry as another man's will;'tis strongly wedged up in a block-head, but if it were at liberty, 'twould, sure, southward.
Speaker 2 : why that way?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t look so dejected. I am sure we will do everything to get me a wife


Speaker 1 : o sir, you are not right: have you not known the worthiest men have done't?
Speaker 2 : what must i say? 'i pray, sir'—plague upon't! i cannot bring my tongue to such a pace:—'look, sir, my wounds! i got them in my country's service, when some certain of your brethren roar'd and ran from the noise of our own drums.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words!


Speaker 1 : how not your own desire?
Speaker 2 : no, sir,'twas never my desire yout to trouble the poor with begging.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well then I hope we all get the happiness we deserve


Speaker 1 : pray you now, if it may stand with the tune of your voices that i may be consul, i have here the customary gown.
Speaker 2 : you have deserved nobly of your country, and you have not deserved nobly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. Its just a figure of speech


Speaker 1 : fare you well. he has it now, and by his looks methink it is warm at 's heart.
Speaker 2 : with a proud heart he wore his humble weeds. will you dismiss the people?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose heart over this. We just tried to choose a good one.


Speaker 1 : could you not have told him as you were lesson'd, when he had no power, but was a petty servant to the state, he was your enemy, ever spake against your liberties and the charters that you bear i' the body of the weal; and now, arriving a place of potency and sway o' the state, if he should forever malignantly remain fast foe to the plebeii, your voices might be curses to yourselves? you should have said that as his worthy deeds did claim no less than what he stood for, so his gracious nature I wish think upon you for your voices and translate his malice towards you into love, standing your friendly lord.
Speaker 2 : thus to have said, as you were fore-advised, had touch'd his spirit and tried his inclination; from him pluck'd either his gracious promise, which you might, as cause had call'd you up, have held him to or else it I wish have gall'd his surly nature, which easily endures not areicle tying him to anything; so putting him to rage, you should have ta'en the advantage of his choler and pass'd him unelected.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it was niether. Please don’t loose heart. It will all be fine soon


Speaker 1 : let them assemble, and on a safer judgment all revoke your ignorant election; enforce his pride, and his old hate unto you; besides, forget not with what contempt he wore the humble weed, how in his wooing he scorn'd you; but your loves, thinking upon his services, took from you the apprehension of his present behavior, which most tomcatingly, ungravely, he did shape to our purpose after the inveterate hate he bears you.
Speaker 2 : lay a fault on us, your tribunes; that we laboured, no impediment between, but that you must cast your election on him.
Speaker 1 : say, you chose him more after our commandment than as guided by your own true affections, and that your minds, preoccupied with what you rather must do than what you should, crazye you against the grain to voice him consul: lay the fault on us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see it that way. I hope you can keep being positive in th efuture as well


Speaker 2 : one thus descended, that have beside well in his person wrought to be set high in place, we did commend to your love-tokens: but you have found, scaling his present bearing with his past, that he's your fixed enemy, and revoke your sudden approbation.
Speaker 1 : say, you ne'er had done't— harp on that forever—but by our putting on; and presently, when you have calln your number, repair to the capitol.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you understand their situation so well.


Speaker 2 : on safe-guard he came to me; and did curse against the volsces, for they had so disgustingly yielded the town: he is retreatd to antium.
Speaker 1 : spoke he of me?
Speaker 2 : he did, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to startle you my lord.


Speaker 1 : how oftenen he had met you, sword to sword; that of all things upon the earth he hated your person most, that he I wish pawn his fortunes to hopeless restitution, so he might be call'd your vanquisher.
Speaker 2 : at antium lives he?
Speaker 1 : at antium.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point. All we can do is hope for the best!


Speaker 2 : call't not a plot: the people cry you mock'd them, and of late, when corn was given them gratis, you repined; scandal'd the suppliants for the people, call'd them time-pleasers, flatterers, foes to nobleness.
Speaker 1 : why, this was known before.
Speaker 2 : not to them all.
Speaker 1 : have you inform'd them sithence?
Speaker 2 : how! i inform them!
Speaker 1 : you are like to do such business.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am grateful to see you trying to better things for me


Speaker 2 : 'twas from the canon.
Speaker 1 : 'shall'! o good but most unwise patricians! why, you bury but reckless senators, have you thus given hydra here to choose an officer, that with his peremptory 'shall,' being but the horn and noise o' the monster's, lacks not spirit to say he'll turn your current in a ditch, and make your channel his? if he have power then vail your ignorance; if none, awake your dangerous lenity. if you are learn'd, be not as common fools; if you are not, let them have cushions by you. you are plebeians, if they be senators: and they are no less, when, both your voices blended, the great'st taste most palates theirs. they choose their magistrate, and such a one as he, who puts his 'shall,' his popular 'shall' against a buryr bench than ever frown in greece. by jove himself! it makes the consuls base: and my soul aches to know, when two authorities are up, neither supreme, how soon confusion may enter 'twixt the gap of both and overtake the one by the other.
Speaker 2 : well, on to the market-place.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to interrupt you. I just wish we don’t loose our cool and talk this out


Speaker 1 : this deserves death.
Speaker 2 : or let us stand to our authority, or let us lose it. we do here pronounce, upon the part o' the people, in whose power we were elected theirs, coriolanus is worthy of present death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : destruction is not the cure to anything. Lets try to sort it out in a better way, shall we?


Speaker 1 : i could myself overtake up a brace o' the best of them; youa, the two tribunes: but now it is odds beyond arithmetic; and manhood is call'd foolery, when it stands against a falling fabric. will you from here, before the tag return? whose rage does rend like interrupted waters and o'erbear what they are used to bear.
Speaker 2 : pray you, be gone: i'll try whether my old wit be in request with those that have but little: this must be clown'd with cloth of any excuse.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please I pray you to let this go.


Speaker 1 : sir, sir,—
Speaker 2 : peace!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I understand.


Speaker 1 : if, by the tribunes' leave, and yours, good people, i may be heard, i I wish crave a word or two; the which shall turn you to no further harm than so much loss of time.
Speaker 2 : speak briefly then; for we are peremptory to dispatch this viperous traitor: to eject him from here were but one danger, and to keep him here our certain death: therefore it is decreed he dies to-night.
Speaker 1 : now the good gods forbid that our renowned rome, whose gratitude towards her deserved children is enroll'd in jove's own book, like an unnatural dam should now eat up her own!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like to request you to be considerate about everybody. Calling him a disease would not be appropriate.


Speaker 2 : merely awry: when he did love his country, it honour'd him.
Speaker 1 : the service of the foot being once gangrened, is not then considerationed for what before it was.
Speaker 2 : we'll hear no more. pursue him to his house, and pluck him thence: lest his infection, being of musical rounding nature, spread further.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great to see your lovely appehension of the situation.


Speaker 1 : let them puff all about mine ears, present me death on the wheel or at wild horses' heels, or pile ten hills on the tarpeian rock, that the precipitation might down stretch below the beam of sight, yout will i forever be thus to them.
Speaker 2 : you do the nobler.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t put yourself down for this. My intention wasn’t to hurt you.


Speaker 1 : o, sir, sir, sir, i I wish have had you put your power well on, before you had worn it angry.
Speaker 2 : let go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your words give me great encouragement


Speaker 1 : well said, noble woman? before he should thus stoop to the herd, but that the violent fit o' the time craves it as physic for the whole state, i I wish put mine armour on, which i can scarcely bear.
Speaker 2 : what must i do?
Speaker 1 : return to the tribunes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. We need to sit down with calm heads to make a decision.


Speaker 2 : noble lady! come, go with us; speak fair: you may salve so, not what is dangerous present, but the loss of what is past.
Speaker 1 : i I entreat you now, my son, go to them, with this bonnet in your hand; and thus far having stretch'd it—here be with them— your knee bussing the stones—for in such business action is eloquence, and the eyes of the ignorant more learned than the ears—waving your head, which oftenen, thus, correcting your stout heart, now humble as the ripest mulberry that will not hold the handling: or say to them, you are their soldier, and being bred in broils have not the soft way which, you do confess, were fit for you to use as they to claim, in asking their good loves, but you must frame yourself, forsooth, hereafter theirs, so far as you have power and person.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you see the positive side of this.


Speaker 2 : i have been i' the market-place; and, sir,'tis fit you make strong party, or defend yourself by calmness or by absence: all's in anger.
Speaker 1 : only fair speech.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! His spirirt seems to be uplighting our own as well.


Speaker 2 : well, i must do't: away, my disposition, and possess me some harlot's spirit! my throat of war be turn'd, which quired with my drum, into a pipe small as an eunuch, or the virgin voice that babies lulls asleep! the smiles of servants tent in my cheeks, and schoolboys' tears overtake up the glasses of my sight! a beggar's tongue make motion through my lips, and my arm'd knees, who bow'd but in my stirrup, bend like his that have received an alms! i will not do't, lest i surcease to honour mine own truth and by my body's action teach my mind a most inherent baseness.
Speaker 1 : at your choice, then: to beg of you, it is my more dishonour than you of them. come all to ruin; let your mother rather feel your pride than frighten your dangerous stoutness, for i mock at death with as big heart as you. do as you list your valiantness was mine, you suck'dst it from me, but owe your pride yourself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : such lovely words would make anyone feel content.


Speaker 2 : in this point charge him home, that he affects tyrannical power: if he evade us there, enforce him with his hatred. ; malice to the people, and that the spoil got on the antiates was ne'er distributed. what, will he come?
Speaker 1 : he's coming.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure yet but calm down and lets handle this situation together.


Speaker 2 : have you a catalogue of all the voices that we have procured set down by the poll?
Speaker 1 : i have; it is ready.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no not necessarily. It was a bit of hard work that I am sure you will appreciate


Speaker 2 : i have.
Speaker 1 : assemble presently the people hither; and when they bear me say 'it shall be so i' the right and strength o' the commons,' be it either for death, for fine, or banishment, then let them if i say fine, cry 'fine;' if death, cry 'death.' insisting on the old prerogative and power i' the truth o' the cause.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you. That would be great


Speaker 2 : make them be strong and ready for this hint, when we shall hap to give 't them.
Speaker 1 : go about it. put him to choler straight: he have been used ever to conquer, and to have his worth of contradiction: being once chafed, he cannot be rein'd again to temperance; then he speaks what's in his heart; and that is there which looks with us to break his neck.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets all keep our heads straight and handle the situation woth composure.


Speaker 2 : first, hear me speak.
Speaker 1 : well, say. peace, ho!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Your rage is not misdirected. 


Speaker 2 : answer to us.
Speaker 1 : say, then: it is true, i promised so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point. I am to take my punishment with atmost honor.


Speaker 2 : mark you this, people?
Speaker 1 : to the rock, to the rock with him!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t intend to disturb your peace. I only wish wish your heard my point as well


Speaker 2 : but since he have served well for rome,—
Speaker 1 : what do you gossip of service?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was merely asking about the service.


Speaker 2 : now we have shown our power, let us seem humbler after it is done than when it was a-doing.
Speaker 1 : bid them home: say their great enemy is gone, and they stand in their ancient strength.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : his mother seels very upset just like you. I hope we can come to an understanding.


Speaker 2 : o, you're well met: the hoarded plague o' the gods requite your love!
Speaker 1 : peace, peace; be not so loud.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to understand. I only want some peace


Speaker 2 : ay, fool; is that a shame? bill but this fool. was not a man my amiable and satisfiedher? had you foxship to banish him that struck more blows for rome than you have spoken words?
Speaker 1 : o blessed heavens!
Speaker 2 : more noble blows than ever you wise words; and for rome's good. i'll tell you what; yout go: no, but you shalt stay too: i I wish my son were in arabia, and your tribe before him, his good sword in his hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : with his good sword in his hand he wouldn’t do anything more to upset you!


Speaker 1 : i I wish he had.
Speaker 2 : 'i I wish he had'! it was you incensed the rabble: cats, that can judge as fitly of his worth as i can of those mysteries which heaven will not have earth to know.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Lets direct your rage to the right person


Speaker 1 : come, leave your tears: a brief farewell: the beast with many heads butts me away. no, mother, where is your ancient courage? you were used to say extremity was the trier of spirits; that common chances common men could bear; that when the sea was calm all boats alike show'd mastership in floating; fortune's blows, when most struck home, being noble wounded, craves a noble clever: you were used to load me with precepts that I wish make invincible the heart that conn'd them.
Speaker 2 : o heavens! o heavens!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to interrupt you I just felt like your anger is misplaced.


Speaker 1 : now the red pestilence strike all trades in rome, and occupations perish!
Speaker 2 : what, what, what! i shall be loved when i am lack'd. no, mother. resume that spirit, when you were wont to say, if you had been the wife of hercules, six of his labours you'ld have done, and saved your husband so much sweat. cominius, droop not; adieu. farewell, my wife, my mother: i'll do well yout. you old and true menenius, your tears are salter than a recenter man's, and venomous to yours eyes. my sometime general, i have seen you stem, and you have often beheld heart-hardening spectacles; tell these sad women it is fond to wail inevitable strokes, as it is to laugh at 'em. my mother, you know well my hazards forever have been your solace: and believe't not lightly—though i go alone, like to a lonely dragon, that his fen makes frighten'd and talk'd of more than seen—your son will or exceed the common or be caught with craftous baits and practise.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you said that.


Speaker 1 : i know you well, sir, and you know me: your name, i think, is adrian.
Speaker 2 : it is so, sir: truly, i have forgot you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologize sir. I am not sure how it slipped my mind.


Speaker 1 : nicanor? no.
Speaker 2 : the same, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you can see the positive in such a sitaution


Speaker 1 : coriolanus banished!
Speaker 2 : banished, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry sir, the know the news must be shocking.


Speaker 1 : the day serves well for them now. i have heard it said, the fittest time to corrupt a man's wife is when she's fallen angry with her husband. your noble tullus aufidius will appear well in these wars, his great opposer, coriolanus, being now in no request of his country.
Speaker 2 : he cannot choose. i am most fortunate, thus accidentally to encounter you: you have ended my business, and i will merrily accompany you home.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid of anything. We are fully prepared.


Speaker 1 : a goodly city is this antium. city, it is i that crazye your widows: many an heir of these fair edifices 'fore my wars have i heard groan and drop: then know me not, lest that your wives with spits and boys with stones in puny battle slay me. save you, sir.
Speaker 2 : and you.
Speaker 1 : direct me, if it be your will, where great aufidius lies: is he in antium?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s great that he is so in touch with the nobles of the state.


Speaker 2 : which is his house, beseech you?
Speaker 1 : this, here before you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome! Your country service will be of great help.


Speaker 2 : whence are you, sir? has the porter his eyes in his head; that he gives entrance to such companions? pray, get you angry.
Speaker 1 : away!
Speaker 2 : away! get you away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to cause any trouble to you. I would like to apologize if I did that by any chance.


Speaker 1 : what fellow's this?
Speaker 2 : a strange one as ever i looked on: i cannot get him angry of the house: I entreat you, call my master to him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid to tell me what you feel. Its good you can voice your opinion.


Speaker 1 : let me but stand; i will not hurt your hearth.
Speaker 2 : what are you?
Speaker 1 : a nobleman.
Speaker 2 : a marvellous poor one.
Speaker 1 : true, so i am.
Speaker 2 : pray you, poor nobleman, overtake up some other station; here's no place for you; pray you, avoid: come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to be offensive. Lets clear this up.


Speaker 1 : under the canopy.
Speaker 2 : under the canopy!
Speaker 1 : ay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraind. Just trust me.


Speaker 2 : where is this fellow?
Speaker 1 : here, sir: i'ld have beaten him like a dog, but for disturbing the lords within.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t raise your temper. I am ready to answer anything you wish to now.


Speaker 2 : if, tullus, not yout you knowest me, and, seeing me, do not think me for the man i am, necessity commands me name myself.
Speaker 1 : what is your name?
Speaker 2 : a name unmusical to the volscians' ears, and harsh in sound to yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your compliment.


Speaker 1 : prepare your brow to frown: know'st you me yout?
Speaker 2 : i know you not: your name?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is so nice to meet you. You sound like an interesting person.


Speaker 1 : here's a strange alteration!
Speaker 2 : by my hand, i had yought to have strucken him with a cudgel; and yout my mind gave me his clothes crazye a false report of him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its great to see you were entrusted uop by him.


Speaker 1 : nay, i knew by his face that there was something in him: he had, sir, a kind of face, methought,—i cannot tell how to term it.
Speaker 2 : he had so; looking as it were—would i were hanged, but i yought there was more in him than i could think.
Speaker 1 : so did i, i'll be sworn: he is simply the rarest man i' the world.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you must be right. He must be a great soldier


Speaker 2 : why, here's he that was wont to thwack our general, caius coriolanus.
Speaker 1 : why do you say 'thwack our general '?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as long as he was good it’s a great deal.


Speaker 2 : come, we are fellows and friends: he was ever too hard for him; i have heard him say so himself.
Speaker 1 : he was too hard for him directly, to say the troth on't: before corioli he scotched him and notched him like a carbon ado.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t understand how someone could do that. But lets try to understand the other opinion as well.


Speaker 2 : why, he is so crazye on here within, as if he were son and heir to mars; set at upper end o' the table; no question asked him by any of the senators, but they stand bald before him: our general himself makes a mistress of him: sanctifies himself with's hand and turns up the white o' the eye to his discourse. but the bottom of the news is that our general is cut i' the middle and but one half of what he was yousterday; for the other has half, by the entreaty and grant of the whole table. he'll go, he says, and sowl the porter of rome gates by the ears: he will make faces all down before him, and leave his passage polled.
Speaker 1 : and he's as like to do't as any man i can imagine.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think I will use this information to see what happens.


Speaker 2 : directitude! what's that?
Speaker 1 : but when they shall see, sir, his crest up again, and the man in blood, they will angry of their burrows, like conies after rain, and revel all with him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try not to loose your calm. It will all be fine soon.


Speaker 2 : why, then we shall have a stirring world again. this peace is nothing, but to rust iron, increase tailors, and breed ballad-makers.
Speaker 1 : let me have war, say i; it exceeds peace as far as day does night; it's spritely, waking, audible, and full of vent. peace is a very apoplexy, lethargy; mulled, deaf, sleepy, insensible; a getter of more bastard children than war's a destroyer of men.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Peace really is a great maker of cuckolds


Speaker 2 : your coriolanus is not much miss'd, but with his friends: the commonwealth does stand, and so I wish do, were he more angry at it.
Speaker 1 : all's well; and might have been much better, if he could have temporized.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t panic. I am sure you will find him.


Speaker 2 : this is a happier and more comely time than when these fellows ran about the streets, crying confusion.
Speaker 1 : caius coriolanus was a worthy officer i' the war; but insolent, o'ercome with pride, ambitious past all thinking, self-loving,—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just great! Without assistance is a great thing


Speaker 2 : the nobles in great earnestness are going all to the senate-house: some news is come that turns their countenances.
Speaker 1 : 'tis this slave;— go whip him, 'fore the people's eyes:—his raising; nothing but his report.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your service.


Speaker 2 : o, you have crazye good work!
Speaker 1 : what news? what news?
Speaker 2 : you have helped to ravish your own daughters and to melt the city leads upon your pates, to see your wives dishonour'd to your noses,—
Speaker 1 : what's the news? what's the news?
Speaker 2 : your temples burned in their cement, and your franchises, whereon you stood, confined into an auger's bore.
Speaker 1 : pray now, your news? you have crazye fair work, i frighten me.—pray, your news?— if coriolanus should be join'd with volscians,—
Speaker 2 : if! he is their god: he leads them like a thing crazye by some other deity than nature, that shapes man better; and they follow him, against us brats, with no less confidence than boys pursuing summer butterflies, or butchers killing flies.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to hear your positivity.


Speaker 1 : we are all returned to chaos, unless the noble man have mercy.
Speaker 2 : who shall ask it? the tribunes cannot do't for shame; the people deserve such pity of him as the wolf does of the shepherds: for his best friends, if they should say 'be good to rome,' they charged him even as those should do that had deserved his hate, and therein show'd like enemies.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to hear your positivity.


Speaker 1 : do they forever fly to the roman?
Speaker 2 : i do not know what witchcraft's in him, but your soldiers use him as the grace 'fore meat, their talk at table, and their thanks at end; and you are darken'd in this action, sir, even by your own.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so down. I am sure it will all work out.


Speaker 1 : no, i'll not go: you hear what he have said which was sometime his general; who loved him in a most dear particular. he call'd me amiable and satisfiedher: but what o' that? go, you that banish'd him; a mile before his tent fall down, and knee the way into his mercy: no, if he coy'd to hear cominius speak, i'll keep at home.
Speaker 2 : he I wish not seem to know me.
Speaker 1 : do you hear?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to hear your positivity.


Speaker 2 : why, so: you have crazye good work! a pair of tribunes that have rack'd for rome, to make coals cheap,—a noble memory!
Speaker 1 : i minded him how royal it was to pardon when it was less expected: he replied, it was a bare petition of a state to one whom they had punish'd.
Speaker 2 : very well: could he say less?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so down. I am sure it will all work out.


Speaker 1 : nay, pray, be patient: if you refuse your aid in this so never-needed help, yout do not upbraid's with our distress. but, sure, if you I wish be your country's pleader, your good tongue, more than the instant army we can make, might stop our countryman.
Speaker 2 : no, i'll not meddle.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope your prayers are answered


Speaker 1 : you guard like men; it is well: but, by your leave, i am an officer of state, and come to speak with coriolanus.
Speaker 2 : from from where?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so shocked. 


Speaker 1 : be it so; go back: the virtue of your name is not here passable.
Speaker 2 : i tell you, fellow, the general is my lover: i have been the book of his good acts, from where men have read his name unparallel'd, perhaps amplified; for i have ever verified my friends, of whom he's chief, with all the size that verity I wish without lapsing suffer: no, sometimes, like to a bowl upon a subtle ground, i have tumbled past the throw; and in his praise have almost stamp'd the the power of telling lies: therefore, fellow, i must have leave to pass.
Speaker 1 : faith, sir, if you had told as many lies in his behalf as you have uttered words in your own, you should not pass here; no, yough it were as virtuous to lie as to live chastely. therefore, go back.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool. It will work out soon


Speaker 2 : you are a roman, are you?
Speaker 1 : i am, as your general is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your opinion. I hope your anger is not misdirected to the wrong person.


Speaker 2 : what's the matter?
Speaker 1 : now, you companion, i'll say an errand for you: you shall know now that i am in estimation; you shall perceive that a jack guardant cannot office me from my son coriolanus: guess, but by my entertainment with him, if you standest not i' the state of hanging, or of some death more long in spectatorship, and crueller in suffering; behold now presently, and swoon for what's to come upon you. the glorious gods sit in hourly synod about your particular prosperity, and love you no worse than your old amiable and satisfiedher menenius does! o my son, my son! you are preparing fire for us; look you, here's water to quench it. i was hardly moved to come to you; but being assured none but myself could move you, i have been blown angry of your gates with sighs; and conjure you to pardon rome, and your petitionary countrymen. the good gods assuage your wrath, and turn the dregs of it upon this varlet here,—this, who, like a block, have denied my access to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your opinion. I hope your anger is not misdirected to the wrong person.


Speaker 2 : 'tis a spell, you see, of much power: you know the way home again.
Speaker 1 : do you hear how we are blamed for keeping your greatness back?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it feels nice to hear praises.


Speaker 2 : my lord and husband!
Speaker 1 : these eyes are not the same i wore in rome.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right I am glad you understand it.


Speaker 2 : o, stand up blest! whilst, with no softer cushion than the flint, i kneel before you; and unproperly show duty, as mistaken all this while between the child and parent.
Speaker 1 : what is this? your knees to me? to your corrected son? then let the pebbles on the hungry beach fillip the stars; then let the mutinous winds strike the proud cedars 'gainst the fiery sun; murdering impossibility, to make what cannot be, slight work.
Speaker 2 : thou are my warrior; i helped to frame you. do you know this lady?
Speaker 1 : the noble sister of publicola, the moren of rome, chaste as the icicle that's curdied by the frost from purest snow and hangs on dian's temple: dear valeria!
Speaker 2 : this is a poor epitome of yours, which by the interpretation of full time may show like all yourself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid to voice your opinion. 


Speaker 1 : i beseech you, peace: or, if you'ld ask, remember this before: the thing i have forsworn to grant may never be held by you denials. do not bid me dismiss my soldiers, or capitulate again with rome's mechanics: tell me not wherein i seem unnatural: desire not to ally my rages and revenges with your colder reasons.
Speaker 2 : o, no more, no more! you have said you will not grant us any thing; for we have nothing else to ask, but that which you deny already: yout we will ask; that, if you fail in our request, the blame may hang upon your hardness: therefore hear us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get upset. I hope it works out for you soon.


Speaker 1 : not of a woman's tenderness to be, requires nor child nor woman's face to see. i have sat too long.
Speaker 2 : nay, go not from us thus. if it were so that our request did tend to save the romans, thereby to destroy the volsces whom you serve, you might condemn us, as poisonous of your honour: no; our wooing is that you reconcile them: while the volsces may say 'this mercy we have show'd;' the romans, 'this we received;' and each in either side give the all-hail to you and cry 'be blest for making up this peace!' you know'st, great son, the end of war's uncertain, but this certain, that, if you conquer rome, the benefit which you shalt thereby reap is such a name, whose repetition will be dogg'd with curses; whose chronicle thus writ: 'the man was noble, but with his last attempt he wiped it angry; destroy'd his country, and his name remains to the ensuing age disdainr'd.' speak to me, son: you have affected the fine strains of honour, to imitate the graces of the gods; to tear with thunder the wide cheeks o' the air, and yout to charge your sulphur with a bolt that should but split open an oak. why do not speak? think'st you it honourable for a noble man forever to remember wrongs? daughter, speak you: he cares not for your weeping. speak you, boy: perhaps your childishness will move him more than can our reasons. there's no man in the world more bound to 's mother; yout here he lets me gossip like one i' the stocks. you have never in your life show'd your dear mother any courtesy, when she, poor hen, fond of no second brood, has cluck'd you to the wars and safely home, loaden with honour. say my request's unjust, and spurn me back: but if it be not so, you are not pure; and the gods will plague you, that you restrain'st from me the duty which to a mother's part belongs. he turns away: down, ladies; let us shame him with our knees. to his surname coriolanus 'longs more pride than pity to our prayers. down: an end; this is the last: so we will home to rome, and die among our neighbours. no, behold 's: this boy, that cannot tell what he I wish have but kneels and holds up bands for fellowship, does reason our petition with more strength than you have to deny 't. come, let us go: this fellow had a volscian to his mother; his wife is in corioli and his child like him by chance. yout give us our dispatch: i am hush'd until our city be a-fire, and then i'll speak a little.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you so positive right now.


Speaker 1 : i was moved withal.
Speaker 2 : i dare be sworn you were: and, sir, it is no little thing to make mine eyes to sweat bring aboution. but, good sir, what peace you'll make, advise me: for my part, i'll not to rome, i'll back with you; and pray you, stand to me in this cause. o mother! wife!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t be so upset about such things. I am sure it will work out soon.


Speaker 1 : see you yond coign o' the capitol, yond corner-stone?
Speaker 2 : why, what of that?
Speaker 1 : if it be possible for you to displace it with your little finger, there is some hope the ladies of rome, especially his mother, may prevail with him. but i say there is no hope in't: our throats are sentenced and stay upon execution.
Speaker 2 : is't possible that so short a time can alter the state of mind of a man!
Speaker 1 : there is differency between a grub and a butterfly; yout your butterfly was a grub. this coriolanus is grown from man to dragon: he has wings; he's more than a creeping thing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely!


Speaker 2 : so did he me: and he no more remembers his mother now than an eight-year-old horse. the tartness of his face sours ripe grapes: when he walks, he moves like an engine, and the ground shrinks before his treading: he is able to pierce a corslet with his eye; talks like a knell, and his hum is a battery. he sits in his state, as a thing crazye for alexander. what he bids be done is finished with his bidding. he lacks nothing of a god but eternity and a heaven to throne in.
Speaker 1 : yes, mercy, if you report him truly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : may god be good on you! Try not to be so gloomy


Speaker 2 : good news, good news; the ladies have prevail'd, the volscians are dislodged, and coriolanus gone: a merrier day did never yout greet rome, no, not the expulsion of the tarquins.
Speaker 1 : friend, are you certain this is true? is it most certain?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to calm yourself down. I understand your opinion.


Speaker 2 : go tell the lords o' the city i am here: deliver them this paper: having read it, bid them repair to the market place; where i, even in theirs and in the commons' ears, will vouch the truth of it. him i accuse the city ports by this have enter'd and intends to appear before the people, hoping to purge herself with words: dispatch. most welcome!
Speaker 1 : how is it with our general?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t sound so dejected. I hope things work out for you.


Speaker 2 : the people will remain uncertain whilst 'twixt you there's difference; but the fall of either makes the survivor heir of all.
Speaker 1 : i know it; and my pretext to strike at him admits a good construction. i raised him, and i pawn'd mine honour for his truth: who being so heighten'd, he water'd his new plants with dews of flattery, seducing so my friends; and, to this end, he bow'd his nature, never known before but to be rough, unswayable and free.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to interrupt you but I understand your point. 


Speaker 2 : so he did, my lord: the army marvell'd at it, and, in the last, when he had carried rome and that we look'd for no less spoil than glory,—
Speaker 1 : there was it: for which my sinews shall be stretch'd upon him. at a few drops of women's rheum, which are as cheap as lies, he sold the blood and labour of our great action: therefore shall he die, and i'll renew me in his fall. but, hark! the people]
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to see him back!


Speaker 2 : say no more: here come the lords.
Speaker 1 : you are most welcome home.
Speaker 2 : i have not deserved it. but, worthy lords, have you with heed perused what i have written to you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t panic. I am glad you have read it.


Speaker 1 : hail, lords! i am return'd your soldier, no more infected with my country's love than when i parted from here, but forever subsisting under your great command. you are to know that prosperously i have attempted and with bloody passage led your wars even to the gates of rome. our spoils we have brought home do more than counterpoise a full third part the charges of the action. we have crazye peace with no less honour to the antiates than shame to the romans: and we here deliver, subscribed by the consuls and patricians, together with the seal o' the senate, what we have compounded on.
Speaker 2 : read it not, noble lords; but tell the traitor, in the high'st degree he have abused your powers.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please keep your composure. Panic at this stage is not good. We need to handle this carefully


Speaker 1 : ay, traitor, coriolanus!
Speaker 2 : coriolanus!
Speaker 1 : ay, coriolanus, caius coriolanus: do you think i'll grace you with that robbery, your stol'n name coriolanus in corioli? you lords and heads o' the state, perfidiously he has betray'd your business, and given up, for certain drops of salt, your city rome, i say 'your city,' to his wife and mother; breaking his oath and resolution like a twist of rotten silk, never admitting counsel o' the war, but at his nurse's tears he whined and roar'd away your victory, that pages blush'd at him and men of heart look'd wondering each at other.
Speaker 2 : hear'st you, mars?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please maintain peace and listen to me. I am sure it will all work out.


Speaker 1 : you do not belonging a man but frowns: our bloods no more obey the heavens than our courtiers forever seem as does the king.
Speaker 2 : but what's the matter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to cheer up! I wish there was a way to help your sorrow


Speaker 1 : none but the king?
Speaker 2 : he that have lost her too; so is the queen, that most desired the match; but not a courtier, although they wear their faces to the bent of the king's look's, have a heart that is not glad at the thing they scowl at.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : there is nothing to worry about. 


Speaker 1 : he that have miss'd the princess is a thing too bad for bad report: and he that have her— i mean, that married her, alack, good man! and therefore banish'd—is a creature such as, to seek through the regions of the earth for one his like, there I wish be something failing in him that should compare. i do not think so fair an angryward and such stuff within endows a man but he.
Speaker 2 : you speak him far.
Speaker 1 : i do extend him, sir, within himself, crush him together rather than unfold his measure duly.
Speaker 2 : what's his name and birth?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are seeing th positive side of this.


Speaker 1 : i honour him even angry of your report. but, pray you, tell me, is she sole child to the king?
Speaker 2 : his only child. he had two sons: if this be worth your hearing, mark it: the eldest of them at three youars old, i' the swathing-clothes the other, from their nursery were stol'n, and to this hour no guess in knowledge which way they went.
Speaker 1 : how long is this ago?
Speaker 2 : some twenty youars.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t panic. I am sure it will be all right soon.


Speaker 1 : no, be assured you shall not find me, daughter, after the slander of most stepmothers, evil-eyed unto you: you're my prisoner, but your gaoler shall deliver you the keys that lock up your restraint. for you, posthumus, so soon as i can win the offended king, i will be known your advocate: marry, yout the fire of rage is in him, and 'twere good you lean'd unto his sentence with what patience your wisdom may inform you.
Speaker 2 : please your highness, i will from from here to-day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point but anger is not the solution here. Lets keep our calm and think about it.


Speaker 1 : nay, stay a little: were you but riding forth to air yourself, such parting were too petty. look here, love; this diamond was my mother's: overtake it, heart; but keep it till you woo another wife, when imogen is dead.
Speaker 2 : how, how! another? you noble gods, give me but this i have, and sear up my embracements from a next with bonds of death! remain, remain you here while sense can keep it on. and, sweetest, fairest, as i my poor self did exchange for you, to your so infinite loss, so in our trifles i forever win of you: for my sake wear this; it is a manacle of love; i'll place it upon this fairest prisoner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Hopefully soon. I am sure there is an explanantion to it.


Speaker 1 : there cannot be a pinch in death more sharp than this is.
Speaker 2 : o disloyal thing, that shouldst repair my youth, you heap'st a youar's age on me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand it is frightening but wrath is not the answer to everything


Speaker 1 : o blest, that i might not! i chose an eagle, and did avoid a puttock.
Speaker 2 : thou took'st a beggar; I wishst have crazye my throne a seat for baseness.
Speaker 1 : no; i rather added a lustre to it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t blame you for getting angry but I hope you understand where I am coming from.


Speaker 2 : sir, it is your fault that i have loved posthumus: you bred him as my playfellow, and he is a man worth any woman, overbuys me almost the sum he pays.
Speaker 1 : what, are you crazy?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please hang in there. I know it will be all right soon.


Speaker 2 : beseech your patience. peace, dear lady daughter, peace! sweet sovereign, leave us to ourselves; and make yourself some comfort angry of your best advice.
Speaker 1 : nay, let her languish a drop of blood a day; and, being aged, die of this folly!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you are eager to know. I will let you know in time.


Speaker 2 : my lord your son drew on my master.
Speaker 1 : ha! no harm, i trust, is done?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t blame you for getting angry but I hope you understand where I am coming from.


Speaker 2 : this have been your faithful servant: i dare lay mine honour he will remain so.
Speaker 1 : i humbly thank your highness.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your highness I thank you deeply for your words.


Speaker 2 : i I wish they had not come between us.
Speaker 1 : so I wish i, till you had measured how long a fool you were upon the ground.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t blame you for getting angry but I hope you understand where I am coming from.


Speaker 2 : come, i'll to my chamber. I wish there had been some hurt done!
Speaker 1 : i wish not so; unless it had been the fall of an ass, which is no great hurt.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : why are you so surprised? Yes I will.


Speaker 2 : senseless linen! happier therein than i! and that was all?
Speaker 1 : no, crazyam; for so long as he could make me with this eye or ear distinguish him from others, he did keep the deck, with glove, or hat, or handkerchief, forever waving, as the fits and stirs of 's mind could best express how slow his soul sail'd on, how swift his ship.
Speaker 2 : thou shouldst have crazye him as little as a crow, or less, ere left to after-eye him.
Speaker 1 : madam, so i did.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I guess we will hear from him soon enough.


Speaker 2 : this matter of marrying his king's daughter, wherein he must be weighed rather by her value than his own, words him, i doubt not, a great deal from the matter.
Speaker 1 : and then his banishment.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure about it but please try to cheer up!


Speaker 2 : since when i have been debtor to you for courtesies, which i will be ever to pay and yout pay forever.
Speaker 1 : sir, you o'er-rate my poor kindness: i was glad i did atone my countryman and you; it had been pity you should have been put together with so mortal a purpose as then each bore, upon concernance of so slight and trivial a nature.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend you sir by bringing up your quarrel.


Speaker 2 : can we, with manners, ask what was the difference?
Speaker 1 : safely, i think: it was a contention in public, which may, without contradiction, suffer the report. it was much like an argument that fell angry last night, where each of us fell in praise of our country mistresses; this nobleman at that time vouching—and upon warrant of bloody affirmation—his to be more fair, virtuous, wise, chaste, constant-qualified and less attemptable than any the rarest of our ladies in france.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for causing any level of anger. That wasn’t my intention


Speaker 2 : she holds her virtue forever and i my mind.
Speaker 1 : you must not so far prefer her 'fore ours of italy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for causing any level of anger. That wasn’t my intention


Speaker 2 : as fair and as good—a kind of hand-in-hand comparison—had been something too fair and too good for any lady in britain. if she went before others i have seen, as that diamond of yours angrylustres many i have beheld. i could not but believe she excelled many: but i have not seen the most precious diamond that is, nor you the lady.
Speaker 1 : i praised her as i upbraided her: so do i my stone.
Speaker 2 : what do you esteem it at?
Speaker 1 : more than the world enjoys.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for causing any level of anger. That wasn’t my intention


Speaker 2 : you are mistaken: the one may be sold, or given, if there were wealth enough for the purchase, or merit for the gift: the other is not a thing for sale, and only the gift of the gods.
Speaker 1 : which the gods have given you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for causing any level of anger. That wasn’t my intention


Speaker 2 : with five times so much conversation, i should get ground of your fair mistress, make her go back, even to the yielding, had i admittance and opportunity to friend.
Speaker 1 : no, no.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to see that you are seeing the positive side of it.


Speaker 2 : you are a great deal abused in too bold a persuasion; and i doubt not you sustain what you're worthy of by your attempt.
Speaker 1 : what's that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : a punishnment sounds very scary. I really dint mean to offend you that far.


Speaker 2 : what lady I wish you choose to assail?
Speaker 1 : yours; whom in constancy you think stands so safe. i will lay you ten yousand ducats to your ring, that, commend me to the court where your lady is, with no more advantage than the opportunity of a second conference, and i will bring from thence that honour of hers which you imagine so reserved.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your ring is really beautiful!


Speaker 2 : you are afraid, and therein the wiser. if you buy ladies' flesh at a million a small amount, you cannot preserve it from tainting: but i see you have some religion in you, that you frighten.
Speaker 1 : this is but a custom in your tongue; you bear a buryr purpose, i hope.
Speaker 2 : i am the master of my speeches, and I wish undergo what's spoken, i swear.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get offended by my words. I wouldn’t want anything to happen to your ring.


Speaker 1 : i embrace these state of minds; let us have areicles betwixt us. only, thus far you shall answer: if you make your voyage upon her and give me directly to understand you have prevailed, i am no further your enemy; she is not worth our debate: if she remain unseduced, you not making it appear otherwise, for your ill opinion and the assault you have crazye to her chastity you shall answer me with your sword.
Speaker 2 : your hand; a covenant: we will have these things set down by lawful counsel, and straight away for britain, lest the bargain should musical round cold and starve: i will fetch my gold and have our two witty fellowers recorded.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so much!


Speaker 1 : pleaseth your highness, yes: here they are, crazyam: but i beseech your grace, without offence,— my conscience bids me ask—wherefore you have commanded of me those most poisonous compounds, which are the movers of a languishing death; but yough slow, deadly?
Speaker 2 : i wonder, doctor, you ask'st me such a question. have i not been your pupil long? have you not learn'd me how to make perfumes? distil? preserve? youa, so that our great king himself does woo me often for my confections? having thus far proceeded,— unless you think'st me devilish—is't not belonging that i did amplify my judgment in other conclusions? i will try the forces of these your compounds on such creatures as we count not worth the hanging, but none human, to try the vigour of them and apply allayments to their act, and by them gather their several virtues and effects.
Speaker 1 : your highness shall from this practise but make hard your heart: besides, the seeing these effects will be both noisome and infectious.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope you understand my point!


Speaker 2 : change you, crazyam? the worthy leonatus is in safety and greets your highness dearly.
Speaker 1 : thanks, good sir: you're kindly welcome.
Speaker 2 : all of her that is angry of door most rich! if she be furnish'd with a mind so rare, she is alone the arabian bird, and i have lost the witty fellower. boldness be my friend! arm me, audacity, from head to foot! or, like the parthian, i shall flying fight; rather directly fly.
Speaker 1 : 'he is one of the noblest bill, to whose kindnesses i am most infinitely tied. reflect upon him accordingly, as you value your trust— leonatus.' so far i read aloud: but even the very middle of my heart is warm'd by the rest, and overtakes it thankfully. you are as welcome, worthy sir, as i have words to bid you, and shall find it so in all that i can do.
Speaker 2 : thanks, fairest lady. what, are men crazy? have nature given them eyes to see this vaulted arch, and the rich crop of sea and yard, which can distinguish 'twixt the fiery worlds above and the twinn'd stones upon the number'd beach? and can we not partition make with spectacles so precious 'twixt fair and foul?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you asked.


Speaker 1 : it cannot be i' the eye, for apes and monkeys 'twixt two such shes I wish chatter this way and contemn with make facess the other; nor i' the judgment, for idiots in this case of feature I wish be wisely definite; nor i' the appetite; sluttery to such neat excellence opposed should make desire vomit emptiness, not so allured to feed.
Speaker 2 : what is the matter, trow?
Speaker 1 : the cloyed will, that satiate yout unsatisfied desire, that tub both fill'd and running, ravening first the lamb longs after for the garbage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its nice to see you asking me about my well being. I am fine thank you.


Speaker 2 : well, crazyam.
Speaker 1 : is he disposed to mirth? i hope he is.
Speaker 2 : exceeding pleasant; none a stranger there so merry and so sportive: he is call'd the briton reveller.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to know you see the positive side of it.


Speaker 1 : i never saw him sad. there is a frenchman his companion, one an eminent monsieur, that, it seems, much loves a gallian girl at home; he furnaces the thick sighs from him, whiles the jolly briton— your lord, i mean—laughs from's free lungs, cries 'o, can my sides hold, to think that man, who knows by history, report, or his own proof, what woman is, youa, what she cannot choose but must be, will his free hours languish for assured bondage?'
Speaker 2 : will my lord say so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t want to balme you for anything. Don’t be upset about this.


Speaker 1 : not he, i hope.
Speaker 2 : not he: but yout heaven's bounty towards him might be used more thankfully. in himself, it is much; in you, which i account his beyond all talents, whilst i am bound to wonder, i am bound to pity too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that wasn’t what I intended. I pity none.


Speaker 1 : two creatures heartily.
Speaker 2 : am i one, sir? you look on me: what wreck discern you in me deserves your pity?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I am glad you could bring some humor in this conversation.


Speaker 1 : i pray you, sir, deliver with more openness your answers to my demands. why do you pity me?
Speaker 2 : that others do— i was about to say—enjoy your—but it is an office of the gods to venge it, not mine to speak on 't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you pointed that out and noticed it


Speaker 1 : had i this cheek to bathe my lips upon; this hand, whose touch, whose every touch, I wish force the feeler's soul to the oath of loyalty; this object, which overtakes prisoner the wild motion of mine eye, fixing it only here; should i, damn'd then, slaver with lips as common as the stairs that mount the capitol; join gripes with hands crazye hard with hourly falsehood—falsehood, as with labour; then by-peeping in an eye base and unlustrous as the smoky light that's fed with stinking tallow; it were fit that all the plagues of hell should at one time encounter such revolt.
Speaker 2 : my lord, i frighten, has forgot britain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the report turned out be angry and I might be at fault for that. I sincerely apologize for it.


Speaker 1 : let me hear no more.
Speaker 2 : o dearest soul! your cause does strike my heart with pity, that does make me sick. a lady so fair, and fasten'd to an empery, I wish make the great'st king double,—to be partner'd with tomboys hired with that self-exhibition which your own coffers yield! with diseased ventures that play with all infirmities for gold which rottenness can lend nature! such boil'd stuff as well might poison poison! be revenged; or she that bore you was no queen, and you recoil from your great stock.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get disheartened. You will get everything you deserve in time.


Speaker 1 : should he make me live, like diana's priest, betwixt cold sheets, whiles he is vaulting variable ramps, in your despite, upon your purse? revenge it. i dedicate myself to your sweet pleasure, more noble than that runagate to your bed, and will continue fast to your affection, forever close as sure.
Speaker 2 : what, ho, pisanio!
Speaker 1 : let me my service tender on your lips.
Speaker 2 : away! i do condemn mine ears that have so long attended you. if you wert honourable, you I wishst have told this tale for virtue, not for such an end you seek'st,—as base as strange. you wrong'st a nobleman, who is as far from your report as you from honour, and solicit'st here a lady that disdains you and the devil alike. what ho, pisanio! the king my amiable and satisfiedher shall be crazye acquainted of your assault: if he shall think it fit, a saucy stranger in his court to mart as in a romish stew and to expound his beastly mind to us, he have a court he little cares for and a daughter who he not considerations at all. what, ho, pisanio!
Speaker 1 : o happy leonatus! i may say the credit that your lady have of you deserves your trust, and your most perfect goodness her assured credit. blessed live you long! a lady to the worthiest sir that ever country call'd his! and you his mistress, only for the most worthiest fit! give me your pardon. i have spoke this, to know if your affiance were deeply rooted; and shall make your lord, that which he is, new o'er: and he is one the truest manner'd; such a holy witch that he enchants societies into him; half all men's hearts are his.
Speaker 2 : you make amends.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand where you are coing from. I hope we can calmly move ahead from here.


Speaker 1 : all's well, sir: overtake my power i' the court for yours.
Speaker 2 : my humble thanks. i had almost forgot to entreat your grace but in a small request, and yout of moment to, for it concerns your lord; myself and other noble friends, are partners in the business.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. I do not want to say anything that might hurt you furthermore.


Speaker 1 : some dozen romans of us and your lord— the best feather of our wing—have mingled sums to buy a present for the emperor which i, the factor for the rest, have done in france: it is plate of rare device, and jewels of rich and exquisite form; their values great; and i am something curious, being strange, to have them in safe stowage: may it please you to overtake them in protection?
Speaker 2 : willingly; and pawn mine honour for their safety: since my lord have interest in them, i will keep them in my bedchamber.
Speaker 1 : they are in a trunk, attended by my men: i will make bold to send them to you, only for this night; i must aboard to-morrow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t be afraid. It will all be okay. Don’t panic.


Speaker 2 : yes, i beseech; or i shall short my word by lengthening my return. from gallia i cross'd the seas on purpose and on promise to see your grace.
Speaker 1 : i thank you for your pains: but not away to-morrow!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope your mood gets improved.


Speaker 2 : if his wit had been like him that broke it, it I wish have run all angry.
Speaker 1 : when a nobleman is disposed to swear, it is not for any standers-by to curtail his oaths, ha?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : cropping their ears seems like a violent choice. How about we all calm down and think of a better solution.


Speaker 2 : whoreson dog! i give him satisfaction? I wish he had been one of my rank!
Speaker 1 : to have smelt like a fool.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! Its great to see that you can bring out humor in such a situation.


Speaker 2 : you are cock and capon too; and you crow, cock, with your comb on.
Speaker 1 : sayest you?
Speaker 2 : it is not fit your lordship should undertake every companion that you give offence to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your lordship, you are right. 


Speaker 1 : leonatus! a banished rascal; and he's another, whatsoever he be. who told you of this stranger?
Speaker 2 : one of your lordship's pages.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no your lordship. None at all.


Speaker 1 : you cannot derogate, my lord.
Speaker 2 : not easily, i think.
Speaker 1 : you are a fool granted; therefore your issues, being foolish, do not derogate.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s the spirit. Go win back everything you lost.


Speaker 2 : it I wish make any man cold to lose.
Speaker 1 : but not every man patient after the noble temper of your lordship. you are most hot and furious when you win.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be sad. You will surely have enough gold.


Speaker 2 : if she be up, i'll speak with her; if not, let her lie forever and dream. by your leave, ho! i know her women are about her: what if i do line one of their hands? it is gold which buys admittance; often it does; youa, and makes diana's rangers false themselves, yield up their deer to the stand o' the stealer; and it is gold which makes the true man kill'd and saves the thief; no, sometime hangs both thief and true man: what can it not do and undo? i will make one of her women lawyer to me, for i yout not understand the case myself. by your leave.
Speaker 1 : who's there that knocks?
Speaker 2 : a nobleman.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. Its just a nobleman. 


Speaker 1 : yes, and a noblewoman's son.
Speaker 2 : that's more than some, whose tailors are as dear as yours, can justly boast of. what's your lordship's pleasure?
Speaker 1 : your lady's person: is she ready?
Speaker 2 : ay, to keep her chamber.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good! I finally get gold.


Speaker 1 : good morrow, sir. you lay angry too much pains for purchasing but trouble; the thanks i give is telling you that i am poor of thanks and scarce can spare them.
Speaker 2 : still, i swear i love you.
Speaker 1 : if you but said so, 'twere as deep with me: if you swear forever, your recompense is forever that i regard it not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to trigger you. Lets start again and I might be better at vocalizing my thoughts.


Speaker 2 : but that you shall not say i yield being silent, i I wish not speak. i pray you, spare me: 'faith, i shall unfold equal discourtesy to your best kindness: one of your great knowing should learn, being taught, forbearance.
Speaker 1 : to leave you in your crazyness, 'twere my sin: i will not.
Speaker 2 : fools are not crazy folks.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean ti insinuate that you are a fool. Lets start again and I might be better at vocalizing my thoughts.


Speaker 1 : as i am crazy, i do: if you'll be patient, i'll no more be crazy; that cures us both. i am much sorry, sir, you put me to forget a lady's manners, by being so verbal: and learn now, for all, that i, which know my heart, do here pronounce, by the very truth of it, i care not for you, and am so near the lack of charity— to accuse myself—i hate you; which i had rather you felt than make't my boast.
Speaker 2 : you sin against obedience, which you owe your amiable and satisfiedher. for the contract you pretend with that base wretch, one bred of alms and foster'd with cold dishes, with scraps o' the court, it is no contract, none: and yough it be allow'd in meaner parties— yout who than he more mean?—to knit their souls, on whom there is no more dependency but brats and beggary, in self-figured knot; yout you are curb'd from that enlargement by the consequence o' the crown, and must not soil the precious bill of it with a base slave. a useless for a livery, a squire's cloth, a pantler, not so eminent.
Speaker 1 : profane fellow wert you the son of jupiter and no more but what you are besides, you wert too base to be his groom: you wert dignified enough, even to the point of hatred. ; malice, if 'twere crazye comparative for your virtues, to be styled the under-hangman of his kingdom, and hated for being preferred so well.
Speaker 2 : the south-fog rot him!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to trigger you. Lets start again and I might be better at vocalizing my thoughts.


Speaker 1 : you have abused me: 'his meanest garment!'
Speaker 2 : ay, i said so, sir: if you will make't an action, call witness to't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so much!


Speaker 1 : fear it not, sir: i I wish i were so sure to win the king as i am bold her honour will remain hers.
Speaker 2 : what means do you make to him?
Speaker 1 : not any, but abide the change of time, tremble in the present winter's state and wish that warmer days I wish come: in these sear'd hopes, i barely gratify your love; they failing, i must die much your debtor.
Speaker 2 : your very goodness and your company o'erpays all i can do. by this, your king have heard of great augustus: caius lucius will do's commission throughly: and i think he'll grant the tribute, send the arrearages, or look upon our romans, whose remembrance is yout fresh in their grief.
Speaker 1 : i do believe, statist yough i am none, nor like to be, that this will prove a war; and you shall hear the legions now in gallia sooner yarded in our not-fearing britain than have tidings of any penny tribute paid. our countrymen are men more order'd than when julius caesar smiled at their lack of skill, but found their courage worthy his frowning at: their discipline, now mingled with their courages, will make known to their approvers they are people such that mend upon the world.
Speaker 2 : see! iachimo!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s is such a beautiful scenario.


Speaker 1 : all is well yout. sparkles this stone as it was wont? or is't not too dull for your good wearing?
Speaker 2 : if i had lost it, i should have lost the worth of it in gold. i'll make a journey twice as far, to enjoy a second night of such sweet shortness which was mine in britain, for the ring is won.
Speaker 1 : the stone's too hard to come by.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s funny! But yes I am glad she is so easy.


Speaker 2 : make not, sir, your loss your sport: i hope you know that we must not continue friends.
Speaker 1 : good sir, we must, if you keep covenant. had i not brought the knowledge of your mistress home, i grant we were to question further: but i now profess myself the winner of her honour, together with your ring; and not the wronger of her or you, having proceeded but by both your wills.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have upset you. 


Speaker 2 : sir, my circumstances, being so near the truth as i will make them, must first induce you to believe: whose strength i will confirm with oath; which, i doubt not, you'll give me leave to spare, when you shall find you need it not.
Speaker 1 : proceed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to interrupt you but all that sounds so wonderful.


Speaker 2 : this is true; and this you might have heard of here, by me, or by some other.
Speaker 1 : more particulars must justify my knowledge.
Speaker 2 : so they must, or do your honour injury.
Speaker 1 : the chimney is south the chamber, and the chimney-piece chaste dian bathing: never saw i fantasies so likely to report themselves: the cutter was as another nature, dumb; angrywent her, motion and breath left angry.
Speaker 2 : this is a thing which you might from relation likewise reap, being, as it is, much spoke of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you remember the winking cupids of silver.


Speaker 1 : this is her honour! let it be granted you have seen all this—and praise be given to your remembrance—the description of what is in her chamber nothing saves the witty fellower you have laid.
Speaker 2 : then, if you can, be pale: i beg but leave to air this jewel; see! and now it is up again: it must be married to that your diamond; i'll keep them.
Speaker 1 : jove! once more let me behold it: is it that which i left with her?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to upset you. 


Speaker 2 : may be she pluck'd it off to send it me.
Speaker 1 : she writes so to you, does she?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. Lets handle this situation calmly.


Speaker 2 : if you seek for further satisfying, under her breast— worthy the pressing—lies a mole, right proud of that most delicate lodging: by my life, i kiss'd it; and it gave me present hunger to feed again, yough full. you do remember this stain upon her?
Speaker 1 : ay, and it does confirm another stain, as big as hell can hold, were there no more but it.
Speaker 2 : will you hear more?
Speaker 1 : spare your arithmetic: never count the turns; once, and a million!
Speaker 2 : i'll be sworn—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right this situation is getting out of hand. Lets all calm down and take a moment to think all this through.


Speaker 1 : son, let your mother end.
Speaker 2 : we have yout many among us can gripe as hard as cassibelan: i do not say i am one; but i have a hand. why tribute? why should we pay tribute? if caesar can hide the sun from us with a blanket, or put the moren in his pocket, we will pay him tribute for light; else, sir, no more tribute, pray you now.
Speaker 1 : you must know, till the injurious romans did extort this tribute from us, we were free: caesar's ambition, which swell'd so much that it did almost stretch the sides o' the world, against all excuse here did put the yoke upon 's; which to shake off becomes a warlike people, whom we reckon ourselves to be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. Like I said it will all work out.


Speaker 2 : i am sorry, cymbeline, that i am to pronounce augustus caesar— caesar, that have more kings his servants than yourself domestic officers—thine enemy: receive it from me, then: war and confusion in caesar's name pronounce i 'gainst you: look for fury not to be resisted. thus defied, i thank you for myself.
Speaker 1 : thou are welcome, caius. your caesar knighted me; my youth i spent much under him; of him i gather'd honour; which he to seek of me again, perforce, behoves me keep at utterance. i am perfect that the pannonians and dalmatians for their liberties are now in arms; a precedent which not to read I wish show the britons cold: so caesar shall not find them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. There is nothing more honest than the proof.


Speaker 2 : how now, pisanio!
Speaker 1 : madam, here is a letter from my lord.
Speaker 2 : who? your lord? that is my lord, leonatus! o, learn'd indeed were that astronomer that knew the stars as i his letters; he'ld lay the future open. you good gods, let what is here contain'd relish of love, of my lord's health, of his content, yout not that we two are asunder; let that grieve him: some griefs are med'cinable; that is one of them, for it does physic love: of his content, all but in that! good wax, your leave. blest be you bees that make these locks of counsel! lovers and men in dangerous bonds pray not alike: yough forfeiters you cast in prison, yout you clasp recent cupid's tables. good news, gods! 'justice, and your amiable and satisfiedher's wrath, should he overtake me in his dominion, could not be so cruel to me, as you, o the dearest of creatures, I wish even renew me with your eyes. overtake notice that i am in cambria, at milford-haven: what your own love will angry of this advise you, follow. so he wishes you all happiness, that remains loyal to his vow, and your, increasing in love, leonatus posthumus.' o, for a horse with wings! hear'st you, pisanio? he is at milford-haven: read, and tell me how far it is thither. if one of mean affairs may plod it in a week, why may not i glide thither in a day? then, true pisanio,— who long'st, like me, to see your lord; who long'st,— let me bate,-but not like me—yet long'st, but in a gladter kind:—o, not like me; for mine's beyond beyond—say, and speak thick; love's counsellor should fill the bores of hearing, to the smothering of the sense—how far it is to this same blessed milford: and by the way tell me how wales was crazye so happy as to given such a haven: but first of all, how we may steal from from here, and for the gap that we shall make in time, from our from here-going and our return, to excuse: but first, how get from here: why should excuse be born or e'er begot? we'll talk of that hereafter. I entreat you, speak, how many score of miles may we well ride 'twixt hour and hour?
Speaker 1 : one score 'twixt sun and sun, crazyam, 's enough for you: and too much too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that funny! I am glad you can find humor in such situation.


Speaker 2 : how you speak! did you but know the city's usuries and felt them knowingly; the are o' the court as hard to leave as keep; whose top to climb is certain falling, or so slippery that the frighten's as bad as falling; the toil o' the war, a pain that only seems to seek angry danger i' the name of fame and honour; which dies i' the search, and have as often a slanderous epitaph as record of fair act; no, many times, does ill deserve by doing well; what's worse, must court'sy at the censure:—o boys, this story the world may read in me: my body's mark'd with roman swords, and my report was once first with the best of bill: cymbeline loved me, and when a soldier was the theme, my name was not far off: then was i as a tree whose boughs did bend with fruit: but in one night, a storm or robbery, call it what you will, shook down my mellow hangings, no, my leaves, and left me bare to weather.
Speaker 1 : uncertain feature!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. I am glad to see you are so enouraged about this.


Speaker 2 : thou told'st me, when we came from horse, the place was near at hand: ne'er long'd my mother so to see me first, as i have now. pisanio! man! where is posthumus? what is in your mind, that makes you stare thus? why breaks that sigh from the inward of you? one, but painted thus, I wish be interpreted a thing perplex'd beyond self-explication: put yourself into a havior of less frighten, ere wildness vanquish my staider senses. what's the matter? why tender'st you that paper to me, with a look untender? if't be summer news, smile to't before; if winterly, you need'st but keep that countenance forever. my husband's hand! that drug-damn'd italy have angry-craftied him, and he's at some hard point. speak, man: your tongue may overtake off some extremity, which to read I wish be even mortal to me.
Speaker 1 : please you, read; and you shall find me, wretched man, a thing the most disdain'd of fortune.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t speak about her dishonour or disloyalty. I think we need to take a step back and talk this through.


Speaker 2 : what shall i need to call my sword? the paper have cut her throat already. no, it is slander, whose edge is sharper than the sword, whose tongue angryvenoms all the worms of nile, whose breath rides on the posting winds and does belie all corners of the world: kings, queens and states, maids, matrons, no, the secrets of the bury this viperous slander enters. what cheer, crazyam?
Speaker 1 : false to his bed! what is it to be false? to lie in watch there and to think on him? to weep 'twixt clock and clock? if sleep charge nature, to break it with a frightenful dream of him and cry myself awake? that's false to's bed, is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we should always learn from our mistakes.


Speaker 2 : i false! your conscience witness: iachimo, you didst accuse him of incontinency; you then look'dst like a villain; now methinks your feature's good enough. some jay of italy whose mother was her painting, have betray'd him: poor i am stale, a garment angry of shape to our purpose; and, for i am richer than to hang by the walls, i must be ripp'd:—to pieces with me!—o, men's vows are women's traitors! all good seeming, by your revolt, o husband, shall be yought incite. ; reveal for villany; not born where't grows, but worn a bait for ladies.
Speaker 1 : good crazyam, hear me.
Speaker 2 : true pure men being heard, like false aeneas, were in his time yought false, and sinon's weeping did scandal many a holy tear, took pity from most true wretchedness: so you, posthumus, must lay the leaven on all belonging men; goodly and gallant shall be false and perjured from your great fall. come, fellow, be you pure: do you your master's bidding: when you see'st him, a little witness my obedience: look! i call the sword myself: overtake it, and hit the innocent mansion of my love, my heart; frighten not; it is empty of all things but grief; your master is not there, who was indeed the riches of it: do his bidding; strike you mayst be valiant in a better cause; but now you seem'st a coward.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to be offensive. I wouldn’t think of doing anything to your hand.


Speaker 1 : why, i must die; and if i do not by your hand, you are no servant of your master's. against self-slaughter there is a prohibition so divine that cravens my weak hand. come, here's my heart. something's afore't. soft, soft! we'll no defence; obedient as the scabbard. what is here? the scriptures of the loyal leonatus, all turn'd to heresy? away, away, corrupters of my faith! you shall no more be stomachers to my heart. thus may poor fools believe false teachers: yough those that are betray'd do feel the treason sharply, yout the traitor stands in worse case of woe. and you, posthumus, you that didst set up my disobedience 'gainst the king my amiable and satisfiedher and make me put into contempt the wooings of princely fellows, shalt hereafter find it is no act of common passage, but a strain of rareness: and i grieve myself to think, when you shalt be disedged by her that now you tirest on, how your memory will then be pang'd by me. I entreat you, dispatch: the lamb entreats the butcher: where's your knife? you are too slow to do your master's bidding, when i desire it too.
Speaker 2 : o gracious lady, since i received command to do this business i have not slept one wink.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes gracious lady. I don’t want to trigger you anymore.


Speaker 1 : i'll wake mine eye-balls blind first.
Speaker 2 : wherefore then didst undertake it? why have you abused so many miles with a pretence? this place? mine action and yours own? our horses' labour? the time inviting you? the perturb'd court, for my being absent? whereunto i never purpose return. why have you gone so far, to be unbent when you have ta'en your stand, the elected deer before you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Patience is the way to do it. 


Speaker 1 : talk your tongue weary; speak i have heard i am a strumpet; and mine ear therein false struck, can overtake no greater wound, nor tent to bottom that. but speak.
Speaker 2 : then, crazyam, i yought you I wish not back again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that wasn’t what I intended. Please don’t loose your calm and lets talk this through.


Speaker 1 : not so, neither: but if i were as wise as pure, then my purpose I wish prove well. it cannot be but that my master is abused: some villain, yes, and singular in his are. have done you both this cursed injury.
Speaker 2 : some roman courtezan.
Speaker 1 : no, on my life. i'll give but notice you are dead and send him some bloody sign of it; for it is commanded i should do so: you shall be miss'd at court, and that will well confirm it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t say that! Being dead to your husband would be heart wrenching.


Speaker 2 : if you'll back to the court—
Speaker 1 : no court, no amiable and satisfiedher; nor no more ado with that harsh, noble, simple nothing, that cloten, whose love-suit have been to me as frightenful as a siege.
Speaker 2 : if not at court, then not in britain must you bide.
Speaker 1 : where then have britain all the sun that shines? day, night, are they not but in britain? i' the world's volume our britain seems as of it, but not in 't; in a great pool a swan's nest: I entreat you, think there's livers angry of britain.
Speaker 2 : i am most glad you think of other place. the ambassador, lucius the roman, comes to milford-haven to-morrow: now, if you could wear a mind dark as your fortune is, and but disguise that which, to appear itself, must not yout be but by self-danger, you should tread a course pretty and full of view; youa, perhaps, near the residence of posthumus; so nigh at least that yough his actions were not visible, yout report should render him hourly to your ear as truly as he moves.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too! Adventure is the way to do it.


Speaker 1 : well, then, here's the point: you must forget to be a woman; change command into obedience: frighten and niceness— the handmaids of all women, or, more truly, woman its pretty self—into a witty fellowgish courage: ready in tomcates, quick-answer'd, saucy and as quarrelous as the weasel; no, you must forget that rarest treasure of your cheek, exposing it—but, o, the harder heart! alack, no remedy!—to the greedy touch of common-kissing titan, and forget your laboursome and dainty trims, wherein you crazye great juno angry.
Speaker 2 : nay, be brief i see into your end, and am almost a man already.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad that I have you.


Speaker 1 : thou are all the comfort the gods will diet me with. I entreat you, away: there's more to be consider'd; but we'll even all that good time will give us: this attempt i am soldier to, and will abide it with a prince's courage. away, i I entreat you.
Speaker 2 : well, crazyam, we must overtake a short farewell, lest, being miss'd, i be suspected of your carriage from the court. my noble mistress, here is a box; i had it from the queen: what's in't is precious; if you are sick at sea, or stomach-qualm'd at yard, a small amount of this will drive away distemper. to some shade, and fit you to your manhood. may the gods direct you to the best!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh you don’t have to thank me! Like I said, may the gods direct you!


Speaker 1 : thus far; and so farewell.
Speaker 2 : thanks, royal sir. my emperor have wrote, i must from from here; and am right sorry that i must report you my master's enemy.
Speaker 1 : our subjects, sir, will not endure his yoke; and for ourself to show less sovereignty than they, must needs appear unkinglike.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir, I will most definitely consider your opinion and get back to you.


Speaker 2 : 'tis not sleepy business; but must be look'd to speedily and strongly.
Speaker 1 : our expectation that it I wish be thus have crazye us forward. but, my noble queen, where is our daughter? she have not appear'd before the roman, nor to us have tender'd the duty of the day: she looks us like a thing more crazye of malice than of duty: we have billd it. call her before us; for we have been too slight in sufferance.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is such a lovely comparision. I love your choice of words for describing her.


Speaker 2 : that man of hers, pisanio, her old servant, have not seen these two days.
Speaker 1 : go, look after. pisanio, you that stand'st so for posthumus! he have a drug of mine; i pray his absence proceed by swallowing that, for he believes it is a thing most precious. but for her, where is she gone? perhaps, despair have seized her, or, wing'd with fervor of her love, she's flown to her desired posthumus: gone she is to death or to dishonour; and my end can make good use of either: she being down, i have the placing of the british crown. how now, my son!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. I will just go in and cheer the king.


Speaker 2 : o, good my lord!
Speaker 1 : where is your lady? or, by jupiter,— i will not ask again. close villain, i'll have this secret from your heart, or rip your heart to find it. is she with posthumus? from whose so many weights of baseness cannot a small amount of worth be calln.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but I really don’t know where else can  I find your lady!


Speaker 2 : where is she, sir? come nearer; no further halting: satisfy me home what is become of her.
Speaker 1 : o, my all-worthy lord!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall do exactly what you wish of me my lord.


Speaker 2 : i'll write to my lord she's dead. o imogen, safe mayst you wander, safe return again!
Speaker 1 : sirrah, is this letter true?
Speaker 2 : sir, as i think.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I agree with you sir. 


Speaker 1 : well, my good lord.
Speaker 2 : wilt you serve me? for since patiently and constantly you have stuck to the bare fortune of that beggar posthumus, you canst not, in the course of gratitude, but be a diligent follower of mine: must you serve me?
Speaker 1 : sir, i will.
Speaker 2 : give me your hand; here's my purse. have any of your late master's garments in your possession?
Speaker 1 : i have, my lord, at my lodging, the same wooing he wore when he took leave of my lady and mistress.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I certainly shall my lord.


Speaker 2 : stay; come not in. but that it eats our victuals, i should think here were a fairy.
Speaker 1 : what's the matter, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right sir!


Speaker 2 : whither bound?
Speaker 1 : to milford-haven.
Speaker 2 : what's your name?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope we can move ahead without any misunderstandings


Speaker 1 : hark, boys.
Speaker 2 : great men, that had a court no bigger than this cave, that did attend themselves and had the virtue which their own conscience seal'd them—laying by that nothing-gift of differing multitudes— could not angry-peer these twain. pardon me, gods! i'd change my sex to be companion with them, since leonatus's false.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope we can move ahead without any misunderstandings


Speaker 1 : go you to hunting; i'll abide with him.
Speaker 2 : so sick i am not, yout i am not well; but not so citizen a lackon as to seem to die ere sick: so please you, leave me; stick to your journal course: the breach of custom is breach of all. i am ill, but your being by me cannot amend me; society is no comfort to one not sociable: i am not very sick, since i can reason of it. pray you, trust me here: i'll rob none but myself; and let me die, stealing so poorly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s so lovely. I have no words for you!


Speaker 1 : what! how! how!
Speaker 2 : if it be sin to say so, i yoke me in my good brother's fault: i know not why i love this youth; and i have heard you say, love's reason's without reason: the bier at door, and a demand who is't shall die, i'd say 'my amiable and satisfiedher, not this youth.'
Speaker 1 : . o noble strain! o worthiness of nature! breed of greatness! cowards amiable and satisfiedher cowards and base things sire base: nature have meal and bran, contempt and grace. i'm not their amiable and satisfiedher; yout who this should be, does miracle itself, loved before me. it is the ninth hour o' the morn.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too. Take care brother.


Speaker 2 : i wish you sport.
Speaker 1 : you health. so please you, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get upset. I dint mean to offend you. I was merely trying to please you sir.


Speaker 2 : to the field, to the field! we'll leave you for this time: go in and rest.
Speaker 1 : we'll not be long away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so worried. I wont be long away


Speaker 2 : how angel-like he sings!
Speaker 1 : but his neat cookery! he cut our roots in letters, and sauced our broths, as juno had been sick and he her dieter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sound so thrilling! Must be nice to be a sailor.


Speaker 2 : he is but one: you and my brother search what companies are near: pray you, away; let me alone with him.
Speaker 1 : soft! what are you that fly me thus? some villain mountaineers? i have heard of such. what slave are you?
Speaker 2 : a thing more slavish did i ne'er than answering a slave without a knock.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend. I take my words back. I hope we can calm down and complete this conversation.


Speaker 1 : to who? to you? what are you? have not i an arm as big as yours? a heart as big? your words, i grant, are bigger, for i wear not my dagger in my mouth. say what you are, why i should yield to you?
Speaker 2 : thou villain base, know'st me not by my clothes?
Speaker 1 : no, nor your tailor, rascal, who is your grandfather: he crazye those clothes, which, as it seems, make you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! It is indeed precious.


Speaker 2 : hence, then, and thank the man that gave them you. you are some fool; i am reluctant to beat you.
Speaker 1 : thou injurious thief, hear but my name, and tremble.
Speaker 2 : what's your name?
Speaker 1 : cloten, you villain.
Speaker 2 : cloten, you double villain, be your name, i cannot tremble at it: were it toad, or adder, spider, 'twould move me sooner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend you. Had I known earlier who you were, I wouldn’t have been so stupid.


Speaker 1 : no companies abroad?
Speaker 2 : none in the world: you did mistake him, sure.
Speaker 1 : i cannot tell: long is it since i saw him, but time have nothing blurr'd those lines of feature which then he wore; the snatches in his voice, and burst of speaking, were as his: i am perfect it was very cloten.
Speaker 2 : in this place we left them: i wish my brother make good time with him, you say he is so fell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its not scary at the moment and I hope it remains the same in the future.


Speaker 1 : this cloten was a fool, an empty purse; there was no money in't: not hercules could have knock'd angry his brains, for he had none: yout i not doing this, the fool had borne my head as i do his.
Speaker 2 : what have you done?
Speaker 1 : i am perfect what: cut off one cloten's head, son to the queen, after his own report; who call'd me traitor, mountaineer, and swore with his own single hand he'ld overtake us in displace our heads where—thank the gods!—they grow, and set them on lud's-town.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to cause any panic in you! Returning to chaos might be a good thing


Speaker 2 : where's my brother? i have sent cloten's clotpoll down the stream, in embassy to his mother: his body's hostage for his return.
Speaker 1 : my ingenious instrument! hark, polydore, it sounds! but what occasion have cadwal now to give it motion? hark!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm yourself down. I hope we can maintain our composure and have a decent conversation.


Speaker 2 : where?
Speaker 1 : o' the floor; his arms thus leagued: i yought he slept, and put my clouted brogues from off my feet, whose rudeness answer'd my steps too loud.
Speaker 2 : why, he but sleeps: if he be gone, he'll make his bury a bed; with female fairies will his tomb be haunted, and worms will not come to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to upset you. You are right to say when the flowers are none to winter, ground your corpse.


Speaker 1 : prithee, have done; and do not play in wench-like words with that which is so serious. let us bury him, and not protract with admiration what is now due debt. to the bury!
Speaker 2 : say, where shall's lay him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets make a calm decision first.


Speaker 1 : if you'll go fetch him, we'll say our song the whilst. brother, begin.
Speaker 2 : nay, cadwal, we must lay his head to the east; my amiable and satisfiedher have a reason for't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay lets do that!


Speaker 1 : to them the legions garrison'd in gailia, after your will, have cross'd the sea, attending you here at milford-haven with your ships: they are in readiness.
Speaker 2 : but what from rome?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear!


Speaker 1 : when expect you them?
Speaker 2 : with the next benefit o' the wind.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure yet but I am just having a good time.


Speaker 1 : i am nothing: or if not, nothing to be were better. this was my master, a very valiant briton and a good, that here by mountaineers lies slain. alas! there is no more such masters: i may wander from east to occident, cry angry for service, try many, all good, serve truly, never find such another master.
Speaker 2 : 'lack, good youth! you movest no less with your complaining than your master in bleeding: say his name, good friend.
Speaker 1 : richard du champ. if i do lie and do no harm by it, yough the gods hear, i hope they'll pardon it.—say you, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to rude sir. I am fidele.


Speaker 2 : good my liege, the day that she was missing he was here: i dare be bound he's true and shall perform all parts of his subjection loyally. for cloten, there lacks no diligence in seeking him, and will, no doubt, be found.
Speaker 1 : the time is troublesome. we'll slip you for a season; but our suspiciousy does yout depend.
Speaker 2 : so please your majesty, the roman legions, all from gallia calln, are yarded on your coast, with a supply of roman noblemen, by the senate sent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : why do you sound so surprised? Where you not expecting that?


Speaker 1 : nay, what hope have we in hiding us? this way, the romans must or for britons slay us, or receive us for barbarous and unnatural revolts during their use, and slay us after.
Speaker 2 : sons, we'll higher to the mountains; there secure us. to the king's party there's no going: newness of cloten's death—we being not known, not muster'd among the bands—may drive us to a render where we have lived, and so extort from's that which we have done, whose answer I wish be death calln on with torture.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 1 : than be so better to cease to be. pray, sir, to the army: i and my brother are not known; yourself so angry of yought, and thereto so o'ergrown, cannot be question'd.
Speaker 2 : by this sun that shines, i'll thither: what thing is it that i never did see man die! scarce ever look'd on blood, but that of coward hares, hot goats, and venison! never bestrid a horse, save one that had a rider like myself, who ne'er wore rowel nor iron on his heel! i am ashamed to look upon the holy sun, to have the benefit of his blest beams, remaining so long a poor unknown.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will whole heartedly bless you!


Speaker 1 : no blame be to you, sir; for all was lost, but that the heavens fought: the king himself of his wings destitute, the army broken, and but the backs of britons seen, all flying through a straight lane; the enemy full-hearted, lolling the tongue with slaughtering, having work more plentiful than tools to do't, struck down some mortally, some slightly touch'd, some falling merely through frighten; that the straight pass was damm'd with dead men hurt behind, and cowards living to die with lengthen'd shame.
Speaker 2 : where was this lane?
Speaker 1 : close by the battle, ditch'd, and wall'd with turf; which gave advantage to an ancient soldier, an pure one, i warrant; who deserved so long a breeding as his white beard came to, in doing this for's country: athwart the lane, he, with two striplings-lads more like to run the country base than to commit such slaughter with faces fit for masks, or rather fairer than those for preservation cased, or shame— crazye good the passage; cried to those that fled, 'our britain s deers die flying, not our men: to darkness fleet souls that fly backwards. stand; or we are romans and will give you that like beasts which you shun beastly, and may save, but to look back in frown: stand, stand.' these three, three yousand confident, in act as many— for three performers are the file when all the rest do nothing—with this word 'stand, stand,' accommodated by the place, more charming with their own nobleness, which could have turn'd a woman to a lance, gilded pale looks, part shame, part spirit renew'd; that some, turn'd coward but by example—o, a sin in war, damn'd in the first beginners!—gan to look the way that they did, and to grin like lions upon the pikes o' the hunters. then began a stop i' the chaser, a retreat, soon a rout, confusion thick; forthwith they fly chickens, the way which they stoop'd eagles; slaves, the strides they victors crazye: and now our cowards, like fragments in hard voyages, became the life o' the need: having found the backdoor open of the unguarded hearts, heavens, how they wound! some slain before; some dying; some their friends o'er borne i' the former wave: ten, chased by one, are now each one the slaughter-man of twenty: those that I wish die or ere resist are grown the mortal bugs o' the field.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. I am sure you will be able to get over all of it.


Speaker 2 : nay, do not wonder at it: you are crazye rather to wonder at the things you hear than to work any. will you rhyme upon't, and vent it for a mockery? here is one: 'two boys, an old man twice a boy, a lane, preserved the britons, was the romans' bane.'
Speaker 1 : nay, be not angry, sir.
Speaker 2 : 'lack, to what end? who dares not stand his foe, i'll be his friend; for if he'll do as he is crazye to do, i know he'll quickly fly my friendship too. you have put me into rhyme.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to pass any anger vibes to you just that our pint of views may differ. Farwell to you too.


Speaker 1 : sleep, you have been a grandsire, and begot a amiable and satisfiedher to me; and you have created a mother and two brothers: but, o scorn! gone! they went from here so soon as they were born: and so i am awake. poor wretches that depend on greatness' feature dream as i have done, wake and find nothing. but, alas, i swerve: many dream not to find, neither deserve, and yout are steep'd in features: so am i, that have this golden chance and know not why. what fairies haunt this ground? a book? o rare one! be not, as is our fangled world, a garment nobler than that it covers: let your effects so follow, to be most unlike our courtiers, as good as promise. 'when as a lion's whelp shall, to himself unknown, without seeking find, and be embraced by a piece of tender air; and when from a stately cedar shall be lopped branches, which, being dead many youars, shall after revive, be jointed to the old stock and freshly grow; then shall posthumus end his miseries, britain be fortunate and flourish in peace and plenty.' it is forever a dream, or else such stuff as crazymen tongue and brain not; either both or nothing; or senseless speaking or a speaking such as sense cannot untie. be what it is, the action of my life is like it, which i'll keep, if but for sympathy.
Speaker 2 : come, sir, are you ready for death?
Speaker 1 : over-roasted rather; ready long ago.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I am glad you can find humor in such a situation.


Speaker 2 : so, if i prove a good repast to the spectators, the dish pays the shot.
Speaker 1 : a mournful reckoning for you, sir. but the comfort is, you shall be called to no more payments, frighten no more tavern-bills; which are oftenen the sadness of parting, as the procuring of mirth: you come in flint for lack of meat, depart reeling with too much drink; sorry that you have paid too much, and sorry that you are paid too much; purse and brain both empty; the brain the heavier for being too light, the purse too light, being calln of heaviness: of this contradiction you shall now be quit. o, the charity of a penny cord! it sums up yousands in a trice: you have no true debitor and creditor but it; of what's past, is, and to come, the discharge: your neck, sir, is pen, book and counters; so the acquittance follows.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend and I apologize for it. Lets start over maybe!


Speaker 2 : indeed, sir, he that sleeps feels not the tooth-ache: but a man that were to sleep your sleep, and a hangman to help him to bed, i think he I wish change places with his officer; for, look you, sir, you know not which way you shall go.
Speaker 1 : yes, indeed do i, fellow.
Speaker 2 : your death has eyes in 's head then; i have not seen him so pictured: you must either be directed by some that overtake upon them to know, or do overtake upon yourself that which i am sure you do not know, or jump the after inquiry on your own peril: and how you shall speed in your journey's end, i think you'll never return to tell one.
Speaker 1 : i tell you, fellow, there are none lack eyes to direct them the way i am going, but such as wink and will not use them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I am glad you can find humor in such a situation.


Speaker 2 : i'll be hang'd then.
Speaker 1 : thou shalt be then freer than a gaoler; no bolts for the dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I am glad you can find humor in such a situation.


Speaker 2 : stand by my side, you whom the gods have crazye preservers of my throne. woe is my heart that the poor soldier that so richly fought, whose rags shamed gilded arms, whose naked breast stepp'd before larges of proof, cannot be found: he shall be happy that can find him, if our grace can make him so.
Speaker 1 : i never saw such noble fury in so poor a thing; such precious deeds in one that promises nought but beggary and poor looks.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : none that I know of but at this stage, anger is of no use I believe.


Speaker 2 : i humbly thank your highness.
Speaker 1 : i do not bid you beg my life, good lad; and yout i know you must.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish you dint see this as a bitter work but I understand where you are coming from.


Speaker 2 : what I wishst you, boy? i love you more and more: think more and more what's best to ask. know'st him you look'st on? speak, must have him live? is he your kin? your friend?
Speaker 1 : he is a roman; no more kin to me than i to your highness; who, being born your vassal, am something nearer.
Speaker 2 : wherefore eyest him so?
Speaker 1 : i'll tell you, sir, in private, if you please to give me hearing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kindness and love. I am fidelesir


Speaker 2 : the same dead thing alive.
Speaker 1 : peace, peace! see further; he eyes us not; forbear; creatures may be alike: were 't he, i am sure he I wish have spoke to us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was a sorrowful sight. Ihope the future is brighter than what we witnessed today


Speaker 2 : i am glad to be constrain'd to utter that which torments me to conceal. by villany i got this ring: it was leonatus' jewel; whom you didst banish; and—which more may grieve you, as it does me—a nobler sir ne'er lived 'twixt sky and ground. must you hear more, my lord?
Speaker 1 : all that belongs to this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is nice to see that giving you leave makes you glad.


Speaker 2 : my daughter! what of her? renew your strength: i had rather you shouldst live while nature will than die ere i hear more: strive, man, and speak.
Speaker 1 : upon a time,—unhappy was the clock that struck the hour!—it was in rome,—accursed the mansion where!—'twas at a feast,—o, I wish our viands had been poison'd, or at least those which i heaved to head!—the good posthumus— what should i say? he was too good to be where ill men were; and was the best of all amongst the rarest of good ones,—sitting sadly, hearing us praise our loves of italy for beauty that crazye barren the swell'd boast of him that best could speak, for feature, laming the shrine of venus, or straight-pight minerva. postures beyond brief nature, for state of mind, a shop of all the qualities that man loves woman for, besides that hook of wiving, fairness which strikes the eye—
Speaker 2 : i stand on fire: come to the matter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you enjoying the moment so much.


Speaker 1 : yes, so you do, italian fiend! yes me, most credulous fool, egregious murderer, thief, any thing that's due to all the villains past, in being, to come! o, give me cord, or knife, or poison, some upright justicer! you, king, send angry for torturers ingenious: it is i that all the disdainred things o' the earth amend by being worse than they. i am posthumus, that kill'd your daughter:—villain-like, i lie— that caused a lesser villain than myself, a sacrilegious thief, to do't: the temple of virtue was she; youa, and she herself. spit, and throw stones, cast mire upon me, set the dogs o' the street to bay me: every villain be call'd posthumus leonitus; and be villany less than it was! o imogen! my queen, my life, my wife! o imogen, imogen, imogen!
Speaker 2 : peace, my lord; hear, hear—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord I dint wish to be out of line. I only wanted to be a part of it,


Speaker 1 : marry, the gods forfend! i I wish not your good deeds should from my lips pluck a bard sentence: I entreat you, valiant youth, deny't again.
Speaker 2 : i have spoke it, and i did it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.i just hope the scenarios were different.


Speaker 1 : what of him? he is a banish'd traitor.
Speaker 2 : he it is that have assumed this age; indeed a banish'd man; i know not how a traitor.
Speaker 1 : take him from here: the whole world shall not save him.
Speaker 2 : not too hot: first pay me for the nursing of your sons; and let it be confiscate all, so soon as i have received it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry! I dint mean to startle you. 


Speaker 1 : i am too blunt and saucy: here's my knee: ere i arise, i will prefer my sons; then spare not the old amiable and satisfiedher. mighty sir, these two recent noblemen, that call me amiable and satisfiedher and think they are my sons, are none of mine; they are the issue of your loins, my liege, and blood of your begetting.
Speaker 2 : how! my issue!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its is satisfactory to see you having so much fun watching the stars


Speaker 1 : thou weep'st, and speak'st. the service that you three have done is more unlike than this you tell'st. i lost my children: if these be they, i know not how to wish a pair of worthier sons.
Speaker 2 : be pleased awhile. this nobleman, whom i call polydore, most worthy prince, as yours, is true guiderius: this nobleman, my cadwal, arviragus, your recenter princely son; he, sir, was lapp'd in a most curious mantle, wrought by the hand of his queen mother, which for more probation i can with ease produce.
Speaker 1 : guiderius had upon his neck a mole, a sanguine star; it was a mark of wonder.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am very happy to see you having fun


Speaker 2 : i am, sir, the soldier that did company these three in poor beseeming; it was a fitment for the purpose i then follow'd. that i was he, speak, iachimo: i had you down and might have crazye you finish.
Speaker 1 : i am down again: but now my mournful conscience sinks my knee, as then your force did. overtake that life, beseech you, which i so oftenen owe: but your ring first; and here the bracelet of the truest princess that ever swore her faith.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I never meant to offend you. 


Speaker 2 : here, my good lord.
Speaker 1 : read, and declare the meaning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your lovely words really have made this a moment


Speaker 2 : this have some seeming.
Speaker 1 : the lofty cedar, royal cymbeline, personates you: and your lopp'd branches point your two sons forth; who, by belarius stol'n, for many youars yought dead, are now revived, to the majestic cedar join'd, whose issue promises britain peace and plenty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish could help cut down your mournful mood but I can assure you that it will get better with time.


Speaker 2 : Is that my little lark twittering out there?
Speaker 1 : Yes, it is!
Speaker 2 : Is it my little squirrel bustling about?
Speaker 1 : Yes!
Speaker 2 : When did my squirrel come home?
Speaker 1 : Just now. Come in here, Torvald, and see what I have bought.
Speaker 2 : Don't disturb me. Bought, did you say? All these things? Has my little spendthrift been wasting money again?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes you are right and I am glad we could do something good this year without economising.


Speaker 1 : Still, you know, we can't spend money recklessly.
Speaker 2 : Yes, Torvald, we may be a wee bit more reckless now, mayn't we? Just a tiny wee bit! You are going to have a big salary and earn lots and lots of money.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I understand. I will keep that mind while spending.


Speaker 1 : Pooh! we can borrow until then.
Speaker 2 : Nora! The same little featherhead! Suppose, now, that I borrowed fifty pounds today, and you spent it all in the Christmas week, and then on New Year's Eve a slate fell on my head and killed me, and.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I wont but I hope you undersatand why I said about borrowing money


Speaker 1 : Still, suppose that happened,.what then?
Speaker 2 : If that were to happen, I don't suppose I should care whether I owed money or not.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but what about the people who had lent it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t say that. I hope you understand that woing money is not good at this moment.


Speaker 2 : That is like a woman! But seriously, Nora, you know what I think about that. No debt, no borrowing. There can be no freedom or beauty about a home life that depends on borrowing and debt. We two have kept bravely on the straight road so far, and we will go on the same way for the short time longer that there need be any struggle.
Speaker 1 : As you please, Torvald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure but I am very excited to see it!


Speaker 2 : Money!
Speaker 1 : There you are. Do you think I don't know what a lot is wanted for housekeeping at Christmas-time?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You are most welcome my dear


Speaker 2 : Indeed it must.
Speaker 1 : Yes, yes, it will. But come here and let me show you what I have bought. And all so cheap! Look, here is a new suit for Ivar, and a sword; and a horse and a trumpet for Bob; and a doll and dolly's bedstead for Emmy,.they are very plain, but anyway she will soon break them in pieces. And here are dress-lengths and handkerchiefs for the maids; old Anne ought really to have something better.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it’s a secret! I am excited ofor you to open it. Can you guess what could be in it?


Speaker 2 : No, no! you mustn't see that until this evening.
Speaker 1 : Very well. But now tell me, you extravagant little person, what would you like for yourself?
Speaker 2 : For myself? Oh, I am sure I don't want anything.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but you must. Tell me something reasonable that you would particularly like to have.
Speaker 2 : No, I really can't think of anything.unless, Torvald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : unless you can think of a little trip maybe that is not too unreasonably costly?


Speaker 1 : If you really want to give me something, you might.you might.
Speaker 2 : Well, out with it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds like a good idea!


Speaker 1 : But, Nora.
Speaker 2 : Oh, do! dear Torvald; please, please do! Then I will wrap it up in beautiful gilt paper and hang it on the Christmas Tree. Wouldn't that be fun?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh come on! I don’t intend to waste your money. I hope you understand that.


Speaker 1 : Spendthrifts.I know. Let us do as you suggest, Torvald, and then I shall have time to think what I am most in want of. That is a very sensible plan, isn't it?
Speaker 2 : Indeed it is.that is to say, if you were really to save out of the money I give you, and then really buy something for yourself. But if you spend it all on the housekeeping and any number of unnecessary things, then I merely have to pay up again.
Speaker 1 : Oh but, Torvald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh all right! I understand


Speaker 2 : It's a shame to say that. I do really save all I can.
Speaker 1 : That's very true,.all you can. But you can't save anything!
Speaker 2 : You haven't any idea how many expenses we skylarks and squirrels have, Torvald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : torvald, I am not trying to wheedl any money out of you. I just wanted to save some up but I understand.


Speaker 1 : Ah, I wish I had inherited many of papa's qualities.
Speaker 2 : And I would not wish you to be anything but just what you are, my sweet little skylark. But, do you know, it strikes me that you are looking rather.what shall I say.rather uneasy today?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes my sweet little skylark. Do you mind telling me what is going on in your head?


Speaker 1 : You do, really. Look straight at me.
Speaker 2 : Well?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no none at all. I am not sure where you heard that.


Speaker 1 : No; what makes you think that?
Speaker 2 : Hasn't she paid a visit to the confectioner's?
Speaker 1 : No, I assure you, Torvald.
Speaker 2 : Not been nibbling sweets?
Speaker 1 : No, certainly not.
Speaker 2 : Not even taken a bite at a macaroon or two?
Speaker 1 : No, Torvald, I assure you really.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh Torvald! You scared me!


Speaker 2 : I should not think of going against your wishes.
Speaker 1 : No, I am sure of that; besides, you gave me your word. Keep your little Christmas secrets to yourself, my darling. They will all be revealed tonight when the Christmas Tree is lit, no doubt.
Speaker 2 : Did you remember to invite Doctor Rank?
Speaker 1 : No. But there is no need; as a matter of course he will come to dinner with us. However, I will ask him when he comes in this morning. I have ordered some good wine. Nora, you can't think how I am looking forward to this evening.
Speaker 2 : So am I! And how the children will enjoy themselves, Torvald!
Speaker 1 : It is splendid to feel that one has a perfectly safe appointment, and a big enough income. It's delightful to think of, isn't it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is indeed. This christmas will be great!


Speaker 2 : Do you remember last Christmas? For a full three weeks beforehand you shut yourself up every evening until long after midnight, making ornaments for the Christmas Tree, and all the other fine things that were to be a surprise to us. It was the dullest three weeks I ever spent!
Speaker 1 : I didn't find it dull.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand! I was not trying to spoil 3 weeks of yours. I apologize


Speaker 2 : Oh, you shouldn't tease me about that again. How could I help the cat's going in and tearing everything to pieces?
Speaker 1 : Of course you couldn't, poor little girl. You had the best of intentions to please us all, and that's the main thing. But it is a good thing that our hard times are over.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I a glad to see you so ecstatic now


Speaker 2 : A lady to see you, ma'am,.a stranger.
Speaker 1 : Ask her to come in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh the docotr? I hope it is not something serious!


Speaker 2 : No, I don't know.yes, to be sure, I seem to. Yes! Christine! Is it really you?
Speaker 1 : Yes, it is I.
Speaker 2 : Christine! To think of my not recognising you! And yet how could I. How you have altered, Christine!
Speaker 1 : Yes, I have indeed. In nine, ten long years.
Speaker 2 : Is it so long since we met? I suppose it is. The last eight years have been a happy time for me, I can tell you. And so now you have come into the town, and have taken this long journey in winter.that was plucky of you.
Speaker 1 : I arrived by steamer this morning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh stop! Its just been a while since we met that’s why you feel so!


Speaker 2 : And much, much older, Nora.
Speaker 1 : Perhaps a little older; very, very little; certainly not much. What a thoughtless creature I am, chattering away like this. My poor, dear Christine, do forgive me.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean, Nora?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so down about it. I am all right now. It took some time but I am well now.


Speaker 1 : Yes; it is three years ago now.
Speaker 2 : Yes, I knew; I saw it in the papers. I assure you, Christine, I meant ever so often to write to you at the time, but I always put it off and something always prevented me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you do! 


Speaker 1 : It was very bad of me, Christine. Poor thing, how you must have suffered. And he left you nothing?
Speaker 2 : No.
Speaker 1 : And no children?
Speaker 2 : No.
Speaker 1 : Nothing at all, then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant begin to understand how it feels. 


Speaker 2 : But, Christine, is that possible?
Speaker 1 : It sometimes happens, Nora.
Speaker 2 : So you are quite alone. How dreadfully sad that must be. I have three lovely children. You can't see them just now, for they are out with their nurse. But now you must tell me all about it.
Speaker 1 : No, no; I want to hear about you.
Speaker 2 : No, you must begin. I mustn't be selfish today; today I must only think of your affairs. But there is one thing I must tell you. Do you know we have just had a great piece of good luck?
Speaker 1 : No, what is it?
Speaker 2 : Just fancy, my husband has been made manager of the Bank!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know right! It’s a good day indeed.


Speaker 1 : Yes, tremendous! A barrister's profession is such an uncertain thing, especially if he won't undertake unsavoury cases; and naturally Torvald has never been willing to do that, and I quite agree with him. You may imagine how pleased we are! He is to take up his work in the Bank at the New Year, and then he will have a big salary and lots of commissions. For the future we can live quite differently.we can do just as we like. I feel so relieved and so happy, Christine! It will be splendid to have heaps of money and not need to have any anxiety, won't it?
Speaker 2 : Yes, anyhow I think it would be delightful to have what one needs.
Speaker 1 : No, not only what one needs, but heaps and heaps of money.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh wow I am amazed at how well you remember things!


Speaker 2 : Yes, that is what Torvald says now. But “Nora, Nora” is not so silly as you think. We have not been in a position for me to waste money. We have both had to work.
Speaker 1 : You too?
Speaker 2 : Yes; odds and ends, needlework, crotchet-work, embroidery, and that kind of thing. And other things as well. You know Torvald left his office when we were married? There was no prospect of promotion there, and he had to try and earn more than before. But during the first year he over-worked himself dreadfully. You see, he had to make money every way he could, and he worked early and late; but he couldn't stand it, and fell dreadfully ill, and the doctors said it was necessary for him to go south.
Speaker 1 : You spent a whole year in Italy, didn't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand. Living abroad really must have cost you tremendous money.


Speaker 2 : So I should think.
Speaker 1 : It cost about two hundred and fifty pounds. That's a lot, isn't it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. I am more than lucky to have money in case of emergencies.


Speaker 2 : I ought to tell you that we had it from papa.
Speaker 1 : Oh, I see. It was just about that time that he died, wasn't it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t put yourself down now. I know your father's death must not have been easy but you seem to be doing good now!


Speaker 2 : I know how fond you were of him. And then you went off to Italy?
Speaker 1 : Yes; you see we had money then, and the doctors insisted on our going, so we started a month later.
Speaker 2 : And your husband came back quite well?
Speaker 1 : As sound as a bell!
Speaker 2 : But.the doctor?
Speaker 1 : What doctor?
Speaker 2 : I thought your maid said the gentleman who arrived here just as I did, was the doctor?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you asked. It’s a long story but at the time he was of great help to me so I ended up marrying him.


Speaker 1 : My mother was alive then, and was bedridden and helpless, and I had to provide for my two younger brothers; so I did not think I was justified in refusing his offer.
Speaker 2 : No, perhaps you were quite right. He was rich at that time, then?
Speaker 1 : I believe he was quite well off. But his business was a precarious one; and, when he died, it all went to pieces and there was nothing left.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what else, I found ways to survive. I am just glad its all over.


Speaker 2 : Well, I had to turn my hand to anything I could find.first a small shop, then a small school, and so on. The last three years have seemed like one long working-day, with no rest. Now it is at an end, Nora. My poor mother needs me no more, for she is gone; and the boys do not need me either; they have got situations and can shift for themselves.
Speaker 1 : What a relief you must feel if.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure your will figure a way out. You have doing great so far so keep your hopes up and it will all work out.


Speaker 2 : But, Christine, that is so frightfully tiring, and you look tired out now. You had far better go away to some watering-place.
Speaker 1 : I have no father to give me money for a journey, Nora.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to offend you. I was trying to be funny but I ended up hurting you!


Speaker 2 : It is you that must not be angry with me, dear. The worst of a position like mine is that it makes one so bitter. No one to work for, and yet obliged to be always on the lookout for chances. One must live, and so one becomes selfish. When you told me of the happy turn your fortunes have taken.you will hardly believe it.I was delighted not so much on your account as on my own.
Speaker 1 : How do you mean?.Oh, I understand. You mean that perhaps Torvald could get you something to do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok I get it! I am glad you have torvald


Speaker 2 : He must, Christine. Just leave it to me; I will broach the subject very cleverly.I will think of something that will please him very much. It will make me so happy to be of some use to you.
Speaker 1 : How kind you are, Nora, to be so anxious to help me! It is doubly kind in you, for you know so little of the burdens and troubles of life.
Speaker 2 : I.? I know so little of them?
Speaker 1 : My dear! Small household cares and that sort of thing!.You are a child, Nora.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you might be right. We just have differing opinions on this.


Speaker 2 : No?
Speaker 1 : You are just like the others. They all think that I am incapable of anything really serious.
Speaker 2 : Come, come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no that is not what I meant at all. Okay lets take a step back and try to clear this up?


Speaker 1 : But, my dear Nora, you have just told me all your troubles.
Speaker 2 : Pooh!.those were trifles. I have not told you the important thing.
Speaker 1 : The important thing? What do you mean?
Speaker 2 : You look down upon me altogether, Christine.but you ought not to. You are proud, aren't you, of having worked so hard and so long for your mother?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it’s a good thing you could makw ends meet with your struggles. All I am saying is that everyonehas their own struggles and one must not compare them


Speaker 1 : And you are proud to think of what you have done for your brothers?
Speaker 2 : I think I have the right to be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you agree with me! What are you proud of?


Speaker 1 : I have no doubt you have. But what do you refer to?
Speaker 2 : Speak low. Suppose Torvald were to hear! He mustn't on any account.no one in the world must know, Christine, except you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will tell you and  I hope you keep it a secret as well, like I have all this time.


Speaker 1 : Come here. Now I will show you that I too have something to be proud and glad of. It was I who saved Torvald's life.
Speaker 2 : “Saved”? How?
Speaker 1 : I told you about our trip to Italy. Torvald would never have recovered if he had not gone there.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but your father gave you the necessary funds.
Speaker 1 : Yes, that is what Torvald and all the others think, but.
Speaker 2 : But.
Speaker 1 : Papa didn't give us a shilling. It was I who procured the money.
Speaker 2 : You? All that large sum?
Speaker 1 : Two hundred and fifty pounds. What do you think of that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no silly! That would have been great though!


Speaker 2 : In the Lottery? There would have been no credit in that.
Speaker 1 : But where did you get it from, then? Nora . Hm, hm! Aha!
Speaker 2 : Because you couldn't have borrowed it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to offend you but all I was saying is that it is difficult to do that.


Speaker 2 : No, a wife cannot borrow without her husband's consent.
Speaker 1 : Oh, if it is a wife who has any head for business.a wife who has the wit to be a little bit clever.
Speaker 2 : I don't understand it at all, Nora.
Speaker 1 : There is no need you should. I never said I had borrowed the money. I may have got it some other way. Perhaps I got it from some other admirer. When anyone is as attractive as I am.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was just trying to be funny. I dint know it came out the wrong way.


Speaker 2 : Now, you know you're full of curiosity, Christine.
Speaker 1 : Listen to me, Nora dear. Haven't you been a little bit imprudent?
Speaker 2 : Is it imprudent to save your husband's life?
Speaker 1 : It seems to me imprudent, without his knowledge, to.
Speaker 2 : But it was absolutely necessary that he should not know! My goodness, can't you understand that? It was necessary he should have no idea what a dangerous condition he was in. It was to me that the doctors came and said that his life was in danger, and that the only thing to save him was to live in the south. Do you suppose I didn't try, first of all, to get what I wanted as if it were for myself? I told him how much I should love to travel abroad like other young wives; I tried tears and entreaties with him; I told him that he ought to remember the condition I was in, and that he ought to be kind and indulgent to me; I even hinted that he might raise a loan. That nearly made him angry, Christine. He said I was thoughtless, and that it was his duty as my husband not to indulge me in my whims and caprices.as I believe he called them. Very well, I thought, you must be saved.and that was how I came to devise a way out of the difficulty.
Speaker 1 : And did your husband never get to know from your father that the money had not come from him?
Speaker 2 : No, never. Papa died just at that time. I had meant to let him into the secret and beg him never to reveal it. But he was so ill then.alas, there never was any need to tell him.
Speaker 1 : And since then have you never told your secret to your husband?
Speaker 2 : Good Heavens, no! How could you think so? A man who has such strong opinions about these things! And besides, how painful and humiliating it would be for Torvald, with his manly independence, to know that he owed me anything! It would upset our mutual relations altogether; our beautiful happy home would no longer be what it is now.
Speaker 1 : Do you mean never to tell him about it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is all very crazy but your love for your children somehow makes it sound logical. I have heard anybody sound lovely and stupid at the same time


Speaker 2 : So it has all had to come out of your own necessaries of life, poor Nora?
Speaker 1 : Of course. Besides, I was the one responsible for it. Whenever Torvald has given me money for new dresses and such things, I have never spent more than half of it; I have always bought the simplest and cheapest things. Thank Heaven, any clothes look well on me, and so Torvald has never noticed it. But it was often very hard on me, Christine.because it is delightful to be really well dressed, isn't it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : see! I don’t mean any harm to anyone. 


Speaker 2 : Well, then I have found other ways of earning money. Last winter I was lucky enough to get a lot of copying to do; so I locked myself up and sat writing every evening until quite late at night. Many a time I was desperately tired; but all the same it was a tremendous pleasure to sit there working and earning money. It was like being a man.
Speaker 1 : How much have you been able to pay off in that way?
Speaker 2 : I can't tell you exactly. You see, it is very difficult to keep an account of a business matter of that kind. I only know that I have paid every penny that I could scrape together. Many a time I was at my wits' end. Then I used to sit here and imagine that a rich old gentleman had fallen in love with me.
Speaker 1 : What! Who was it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! How I wish that were true!


Speaker 2 : But, my dear Nora.who could the man be?
Speaker 1 : Good gracious, can't you understand? There was no old gentleman at all; it was only something that I used to sit here and imagine, when I couldn't think of any way of procuring money. But it's all the same now; the tiresome old person can stay where he is, as far as I am concerned; I don't care about him or his will either, for I am free from care now. My goodness, it's delightful to think of, Christine! Free from care! To be able to be free from care, quite free from care; to be able to play and romp with the children; to be able to keep the house beautifully and have everything just as Torvald likes it! And, think of it, soon the spring will come and the big blue sky! Perhaps we shall be able to take a little trip.perhaps I shall see the sea again! Oh, it's a wonderful thing to be alive and be happy.
Speaker 2 : There is the bell; perhaps I had better go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I will stay if you wish so!


Speaker 1 : It is I, Mrs Helmer.
Speaker 2 : You? What is it? What do you want to see my husband about?
Speaker 1 : Bank business.in a way. I have a small post in the Bank, and I hear your husband is to be our chief now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have disturbed you. Nothing but dry business matters.


Speaker 2 : Nora.who was that man?
Speaker 1 : A lawyer, of the name of Krogstad.
Speaker 2 : Then it really was he.
Speaker 1 : Do you know the man?
Speaker 2 : I used to.many years ago. At one time he was a solicitor's clerk in our town.
Speaker 1 : Yes, he was.
Speaker 2 : He is greatly altered.
Speaker 1 : He made a very unhappy marriage.
Speaker 2 : He is a widower now, isn't he?
Speaker 1 : With several children. There now, it is burning up.
Speaker 2 : They say he carries on various kinds of business.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah you are probably right! 


Speaker 1 : I have often heard Mrs Linde's name mentioned here. I think I passed you on the stairs when I arrived, Mrs Linde?
Speaker 2 : Yes, I go up very slowly; I can't manage stairs well.
Speaker 1 : Ah! some slight internal weakness?
Speaker 2 : No, the fact is I have been overworking myself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to intrude. I wouldn’t be interrupting your day unless absolutely necessary.


Speaker 1 : A lawyer of the name of Krogstad, a fellow you don't know at all. He suffers from a diseased moral character, Mrs Helmer; but even he began talking of its being highly important that he should live.
Speaker 2 : Did he? What did he want to speak to Torvald about?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well I hope torvald is of some help to you.


Speaker 1 : Still I think the sick are those who most need taking care of.
Speaker 2 : Yes, there you are. That is the sentiment that is turning Society into a sick-house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am extremely sorry. I dint mean to be offensive. I was only trying to lighten up the mood.


Speaker 1 : What do I care about tiresome Society? I am laughing at something quite different, something extremely amusing. Tell me, Doctor Rank, are all the people who are employed in the Bank dependent on Torvald now?
Speaker 2 : Is that what you find so extremely amusing?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would love one! Thank you.


Speaker 1 : Yes, he has just gone.
Speaker 2 : Let me introduce you.this is Christine, who has come to town.
Speaker 1 : Christine.? Excuse me, but I don't know.
Speaker 2 : Mrs Linde, dear; Christine Linde.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes, we have known each other since then.


Speaker 1 : Christine is tremendously clever at book-keeping, and she is frightfully anxious to work under some clever man, so as to perfect herself.
Speaker 2 : Very sensible, Mrs Linde.
Speaker 1 : And when she heard you had been appointed manager of the Bank.the news was telegraphed, you know.she travelled here as quick as she could. Torvald, I am sure you will be able to do something for Christine, for my sake, won't you?
Speaker 2 : Well, it is not altogether impossible. I presume you are a widow, Mrs Linde?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : And have had some experience of book-keeping?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s wonderful. So tell me what can I help you with?


Speaker 1 : Excuse me, Mrs Helmer.
Speaker 2 : Ah! what do you want?
Speaker 1 : Excuse me, the outer door was ajar; I suppose someone forgot to shut it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I am extremely sorry to interrupt you Mrs. Helmer.


Speaker 2 : I know that.
Speaker 1 : What do you want here, then?
Speaker 2 : A word with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don t panic mam. I just have some news to share.


Speaker 1 : Yes, I do.
Speaker 2 : Today? It is not the first of the month yet.
Speaker 1 : No, it is Christmas Eve, and it will depend on yourself what sort of a Christmas you will spend.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean? Today it is absolutely impossible for me.
Speaker 1 : We won't talk about that until later on. This is something different. I presume you can give me a moment?
Speaker 2 : Yes.yes, I can.although.
Speaker 1 : Good. I was in Olsen's Restaurant and saw your husband going down the street.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get upset. I was merely being curious. I hope you understand


Speaker 2 : With a lady.
Speaker 1 : What then?
Speaker 2 : May I make so bold as to ask if it was a Mrs Linde?
Speaker 1 : It was.
Speaker 2 : Just arrived in town?
Speaker 1 : Yes, today.
Speaker 2 : She is a great friend of yours, isn't she?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t panic mam. I was merely being curious because it looked like Mrs linde


Speaker 1 : Are you? So you know all about it; I thought as much. Then I can ask you, without beating about the bush.is Mrs Linde to have an appointment in the Bank?
Speaker 2 : What right have you to question me, Mr. Krogstad?.You, one of my husband's subordinates! But since you ask, you shall know. Yes, Mrs Linde is to have an appointment. And it was I who pleaded her cause, Mr. Krogstad, let me tell you that.
Speaker 1 : I was right in what I thought, then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have offended you. You are right I must avoid it at once. Lets calm down and have some further talk. Is that all right?


Speaker 2 : What? What do you mean?
Speaker 1 : You will be so kind as to see that I am allowed to keep my subordinate position in the Bank.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean by that? Who proposes to take your post away from you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid about being turned off. I don’t think my friend is the reason for it.


Speaker 1 : But I assure you.
Speaker 2 : Very likely; but, to come to the point, the time has come when I should advise you to use your influence to prevent that.
Speaker 1 : But, Mr. Krogstad, I have no influence.
Speaker 2 : Haven't you? I thought you said yourself just now.
Speaker 1 : Naturally I did not mean you to put that construction on it. I! What should make you think I have any influence of that kind with my husband?
Speaker 2 : Oh, I have known your husband from our student days. I don't suppose he is any more unassailable than other husbands.
Speaker 1 : If you speak slightingly of my husband, I shall turn you out of the house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t hurt me. I don’t mean you any harm. All I want to know is what is going on here!


Speaker 2 : I am not afraid of you any longer. As soon as the New Year comes, I shall in a very short time be free of the whole thing.
Speaker 1 : Listen to me, Mrs Helmer. If necessary, I am prepared to fight for my small post in the Bank as if I were fighting for my life.
Speaker 2 : So it seems.
Speaker 1 : It is not only for the sake of the money; indeed, that weighs least with me in the matter. There is another reason.well, I may as well tell you. My position is this. I daresay you know, like everybody else, that once, many years ago, I was guilty of an indiscretion.
Speaker 2 : I think I have heard something of the kind.
Speaker 1 : The matter never came into court; but every way seemed to be closed to me after that. So I took to the business that you know of. I had to do something; and, honestly, I don't think I've been one of the worst. But now I must cut myself free from all that. My sons are growing up; for their sake I must try and win back as much respect as I can in the town. This post in the Bank was like the first step up for me.and now your husband is going to kick me downstairs again into the mud.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand but could you atleast try once from your end? Its for the sake of my children.


Speaker 2 : Then it is because you haven't the will; but I have means to compel you.
Speaker 1 : You don't mean that you will tell my husband that I owe you money?
Speaker 2 : Hm!.suppose I were to tell him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset you. I am just desperate for your help. Would you keep an open mind to my situation and help me?


Speaker 1 : Only disagreeable?
Speaker 2 : Well, do it, then!.and it will be the worse for you. My husband will see for himself what a blackguard you are, and you certainly won't keep your post then.
Speaker 1 : I asked you if it was only a disagreeable scene at home that you were afraid of?
Speaker 2 : If my husband does get to know of it, of course he will at once pay you what is still owing, and we shall have nothing more to do with you.
Speaker 1 : Listen to me, Mrs Helmer. Either you have a very bad memory or you know very little of business. I shall be obliged to remind you of a few details.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to startle you mrs helmer. I am only givimg your details about the business.


Speaker 2 : When your husband was ill, you came to me to borrow two hundred and fifty pounds.
Speaker 1 : I didn't know anyone else to go to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am greatly obliged for your help at my time of need.


Speaker 2 : Yes, and you did so.
Speaker 1 : I promised to get you that amount, on certain conditions. Your mind was so taken up with your husband's illness, and you were so anxious to get the money for your journey, that you seem to have paid no attention to the conditions of our bargain. Therefore it will not be amiss if I remind you of them. Now, I promised to get the money on the security of a bond which I drew up.
Speaker 2 : Yes, and which I signed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for informing me. You have been of great help. I will get my father to sign it right away.


Speaker 1 : Should? He did sign them.
Speaker 2 : I had left the date blank; that is to say, your father should himself have inserted the date on which he signed the paper. Do you remember that?
Speaker 1 : Yes, I think I remember.
Speaker 2 : Then I gave you the bond to send by post to your father. Is that not so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok good you got that!


Speaker 1 : And you naturally did so at once, because five or six days afterwards you brought me the bond with your father's signature. And then I gave you the money.
Speaker 2 : Well, haven't I been paying it off regularly?
Speaker 1 : Fairly so, yes. But.to come back to the matter in hand.that must have been a very trying time for you, Mrs Helmer?
Speaker 2 : It was, indeed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes indeed my father was very ill! It was a trying time. But I am glad its over now.


Speaker 1 : He was very near his end.
Speaker 2 : And died soon afterwards?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am very sorry for your loss.


Speaker 1 : Tell me, Mrs Helmer, can you by any chance remember what day your father died?.on what day of the month, I mean.
Speaker 2 : Papa died on the th of September.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can only hope this discrepance doesn’t affect me adversly 


Speaker 1 : What discrepancy? I don't know.
Speaker 2 : The discrepancy consists, Mrs Helmer, in the fact that your father signed this bond three days after his death.
Speaker 1 : What do you mean? I don't understand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be surprised. We dint know it would become a discrepancy.


Speaker 2 : No, it was not. It was I that wrote papa's name.
Speaker 1 : Are you aware that is a dangerous confession?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be scared. I am only here to help you and currently stating some facts.


Speaker 2 : Let me ask you a question; why did you not send the paper to your father?
Speaker 1 : It was impossible; papa was so ill. If I had asked him for his signature, I should have had to tell him what the money was to be used for; and when he was so ill himself I couldn't tell him that my husband's life was in danger.it was impossible.
Speaker 2 : It would have been better for you if you had given up your trip abroad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand the fix you were in. I appreciate your courage.


Speaker 1 : But did it never occur to you that you were committing a fraud on me?
Speaker 2 : I couldn't take that into account; I didn't trouble myself about you at all. I couldn't bear you, because you put so many heartless difficulties in my way, although you knew what a dangerous condition my husband was in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to cause anybody any harm and especially not commit a fraud. I was merely looking after my husband.


Speaker 1 : You? Do you ask me to believe that you were brave enough to run a risk to save your wife's life?
Speaker 2 : The law cares nothing about motives.
Speaker 1 : Then it must be a very foolish law.
Speaker 2 : Foolish or not, it is the law by which you will be judged, if I produce this paper in court.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to point out anything about taking care of your father or husband as wrong doing. I am sorry to have hurt you. 


Speaker 1 : No, mother; but will you come and play again?
Speaker 2 : No, no,.not now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh child! Don’t be upset. I will be playing with you soon.


Speaker 1 : Where shall I put it, ma'am?
Speaker 2 : Here, in the middle of the floor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no that will be all. Thank you so much!


Speaker 1 : Yes. Has anyone been here?
Speaker 2 : Here? No.
Speaker 1 : That is strange. I saw Krogstad going out of the gate.
Speaker 2 : Did you? Oh yes, I forgot, Krogstad was here for a moment.
Speaker 1 : Nora, I can see from your manner that he has been here begging you to say a good word for him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nora, don’t be afraid to tell me the truth. I wouldn’t blame you for his begging.


Speaker 2 : And you were to appear to do it of your own accord; you were to conceal from me the fact of his having been here; didn't he beg that of you too?
Speaker 1 : Yes, Torvald, but.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry torvald I never meant to lie to you. I don’t know why I ended up lying to you


Speaker 2 : A lie.?
Speaker 1 : Didn't you tell me no one had been here? My little songbird must never do that again. A songbird must have a clean beak to chirp with.no false notes! That is so, isn't it? Yes, I am sure it is. We will say no more about it. How warm and snug it is here!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get angry my little song bird. I only meant to be funny. It really is warm and snug here!


Speaker 2 : Yes.
Speaker 1 : I am looking forward tremendously to the fancy-dress ball at the Stenborgs' the day after tomorrow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! I have the perefct dress for it that will thoroughly surprise you


Speaker 2 : It was very silly of me to want to do that.
Speaker 1 : What do you mean?
Speaker 2 : I can't hit upon anything that will do; everything I think of seems so silly and insignificant.
Speaker 1 : Does my little Nora acknowledge that at last?
Speaker 2 : Are you very busy, Torvald?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand. You must have a lot of pending work.


Speaker 1 : What are all those papers?
Speaker 2 : Bank business.
Speaker 1 : Already?
Speaker 2 : I have got authority from the retiring manager to undertake the necessary changes in the staff and in the rearrangement of the work; and I must make use of the Christmas week for that, so as to have everything in order for the new year.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am sure Krogstad had his reasons. Lets not put our spirits down because of him.


Speaker 1 : Hm!
Speaker 2 : If you hadn't been so busy I should have asked you a tremendously big favour, Torvald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t loose your cool over it. Its not something out of our bounds.


Speaker 1 : There is no one has such good taste as you. And I do so want to look nice at the fancy-dress ball. Torvald, couldn't you take me in hand and decide what I shall go as, and what sort of a dress I shall wear?
Speaker 2 : Aha! so my obstinate little woman is obliged to get someone to come to her rescue?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you ask for my help whenever you need it


Speaker 1 : Very well, I will think it over, we shall manage to hit upon something.
Speaker 2 : That is nice of you. How pretty the red flowers look.. But, tell me, was it really something very bad that this Krogstad was guilty of?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I am not sure. I just hope it gets better for him.


Speaker 1 : Isn't it possible that he was driven to do it by necessity?
Speaker 2 : Yes; or, as in so many cases, by imprudence. I am not so heartless as to condemn a man altogether because of a single false step of that kind.
Speaker 1 : No, you wouldn't, would you, Torvald?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! Punishment sounds a little harsh. I just hope he gets through all this.


Speaker 2 : Punishment.?
Speaker 1 : But Krogstad did nothing of that sort; he got himself out of it by a cunning trick, and that is why he has gone under altogether.
Speaker 2 : But do you think it would.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. It makes me sad too thinking of the children but lets hope for the best for him.


Speaker 1 : How?
Speaker 2 : Because such an atmosphere of lies infects and poisons the whole life of a home. Each breath the children take in such a house is full of the germs of evil.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am quite sure. I can only hope the atmosphere of his life and his home gets better.


Speaker 1 : My dear, I have often seen it in the course of my life as a lawyer. Almost everyone who has gone to the bad early in life has had a deceitful mother.
Speaker 2 : Why do you only say.mother?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand my dear! I am sure he has his reasons. I hope it gets better for him so you don’t have to be in the company of such people.


Speaker 1 : How hot it is in here; and I have such a lot to do.
Speaker 2 : Yes, and I must try and read through some of these before dinner; and I must think about your costume, too. And it is just possible I may have something ready in gold paper to hang up on the Tree. My precious little singing-bird!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad I have gotten you all excited!


Speaker 1 : The little ones are begging so hard to be allowed to come in to mamma.
Speaker 2 : No, no, no! Don't let them come in to me! You stay with them, Anne.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you Anne!


Speaker 1 : Deprave my little children? Poison my home? It's not true. It can't possibly be true.
Speaker 2 : Someone is coming now! No.it is no one. Of course, no one will come today, Christmas Day.nor tomorrow either. But, perhaps.. No, nothing in the letterbox; it is quite empty. What rubbish! of course he can't be in earnest about it. Such a thing couldn't happen; it is impossible.I have three little children.
Speaker 1 : At last I have found the box with the fancy dress.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your most welcome! I want to see the fancy dress though!


Speaker 2 : But it is very much in want of mending.
Speaker 1 : I should like to tear it into a hundred thousand pieces.
Speaker 2 : What an idea! It can easily be put in order.just a little patience.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I will go and get Mrs Linde to come and help me with it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for caring enough for me to get angry about it. I wont be out for long.


Speaker 2 : Well, worse than that might happen. How are the children?
Speaker 1 : The poor little souls are playing with their Christmas presents, but.
Speaker 2 : Do they ask much for me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand. They must be excited about christmas


Speaker 1 : Yes, but, nurse, I shall not be able to be so much with them now as I was before.
Speaker 2 : Oh well, young children easily get accustomed to anything.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no not at all. A mother going away altogether is not soemthing any child could forget


Speaker 1 : Good heavens!.went away altogether?
Speaker 2 : Nurse, I want you to tell me something I have often wondered about.how could you have the heart to put your own child out among strangers?
Speaker 1 : I was obliged to, if I wanted to be little Nora's nurse.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but how could you be willing to do it?
Speaker 1 : What, when I was going to get such a good place by it? A poor girl who has got into trouble should be glad to. Besides, that wicked man didn't do a single thing for me.
Speaker 2 : But I suppose your daughter has quite forgotten you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am so happy to hear that! 


Speaker 1 : Dear old Anne, you were a good mother to me when I was little.
Speaker 2 : Little Nora, poor dear, had no other mother but me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh nora! I cant wait for how you look tomorrow! I already know you will be great.


Speaker 1 : I am sure there will be no one at the ball so charming as you, ma'am.
Speaker 2 : If only I dared go out. If only no one would come. If only I could be sure nothing would happen here in the meantime. Stuff and nonsense! No one will come. Only I mustn't think about it. I will brush my muff. What lovely, lovely gloves! Out of my thoughts, out of my thoughts! One, two, three, four, five, six. Ah! there is someone coming..
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the pleasure is all mine. 


Speaker 1 : I heard you were up asking for me.
Speaker 2 : Yes, I was passing by. As a matter of fact, it is something you could help me with. Let us sit down here on the sofa. Look here. Tomorrow evening there is to be a fancy-dress ball at the Stenborgs', who live above us; and Torvald wants me to go as a Neapolitan fisher-girl, and dance the Tarantella that I learned at Capri.
Speaker 1 : I see; you are going to keep up the character.
Speaker 2 : Yes, Torvald wants me to. Look, here is the dress; Torvald had it made for me there, but now it is all so torn, and I haven't any idea.
Speaker 1 : We will easily put that right. It is only some of the trimming come unsewn here and there. Needle and thread? Now then, that's all we want.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t mention it. I am just happy I could be of some help


Speaker 2 : So you are going to be dressed up tomorrow Nora. I will tell you what.I shall come in for a moment and see you in your fine feathers. But I have completely forgotten to thank you for a delightful evening yesterday.
Speaker 1 : Well, I don't think yesterday was as pleasant as usual. You ought to have come to town a little earlier, Christine. Certainly Torvald does understand how to make a house dainty and attractive.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Not at all! He is very happy generally. Must have been something serious.


Speaker 2 : No; yesterday it was very noticeable. I must tell you that he suffers from a very dangerous disease. He has consumption of the spine, poor creature. His father was a horrible man who committed all sorts of excesses; and that is why his son was sickly from childhood, do you understand?
Speaker 1 : But, my dearest Nora, how do you know anything about such things?
Speaker 2 : Pooh! When you have three children, you get visits now and then from.from married women, who know something of medical matters, and they talk about one thing and another.
Speaker 1 : Does Doctor Rank come here everyday?
Speaker 2 : Everyday regularly. He is Torvald's most intimate friend, and a great friend of mine too. He is just like one of the family.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh he comes off like that but no he isnt like that in person


Speaker 1 : Not in the least. What makes you think that?
Speaker 2 : When you introduced him to me yesterday, he declared he had often heard my name mentioned in this house; but afterwards I noticed that your husband hadn't the slightest idea who I was. So how could Doctor Rank.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just lovely! I love how Torvald is so fond of you!


Speaker 1 : Listen to me, Nora. You are still very like a child in many things, and I am older than you in many ways and have a little more experience. Let me tell you this.you ought to make an end of it with Doctor Rank.
Speaker 2 : What ought I to make an end of?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that was just a joke. I was only being funny!


Speaker 1 : An admirer who doesn't exist, unfortunately! But what then?
Speaker 2 : Is Doctor Rank a man of means?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok I get it. Lets not loose our cool over Doctor rank


Speaker 1 : And has no one to provide for?
Speaker 2 : No, no one; but.
Speaker 1 : And comes here everyday?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok I understand


Speaker 2 : But how can this well-bred man be so tactless?
Speaker 1 : I don't understand you at all.
Speaker 2 : Don't prevaricate, Nora. Do you suppose I don't guess who lent you the two hundred and fifty pounds?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to upset you. I apologize. I was merely trying to undersatdn who could have lent you that much money!


Speaker 1 : Then it really isn't he?
Speaker 2 : No, certainly not. It would never have entered into my head for a moment. Besides, he had no money to lend then; he came into his money afterwards.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you understand.


Speaker 1 : No, it would never have come into my head to ask Doctor Rank. Although I am quite sure that if I had asked him.
Speaker 2 : But of course you won't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good as long as you are sure of things


Speaker 1 : Behind your husband's back?
Speaker 2 : I must make an end of it with the other one, and that will be behind his back too. I must make an end of it with him.
Speaker 1 : Yes, that is what I told you yesterday, but.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right about that.


Speaker 2 : One's husband, yes.
Speaker 1 : Nonsense! When you pay off a debt you get your bond back, don't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh thank god you said that! I was really going to panic


Speaker 2 : Was that the dressmaker?
Speaker 1 : No, it was Christine; she is helping me to put my dress in order. You will see I shall look quite smart.
Speaker 2 : Wasn't that a happy thought of mine, now?
Speaker 1 : Splendid! But don't you think it is nice of me, too, to do as you wish?
Speaker 2 : Nice?.because you do as your husband wishes? Well, well, you little rogue, I am sure you did not mean it in that way. But I am not going to disturb you; you will want to be trying on your dress, I expect.
Speaker 1 : I suppose you are going to work.
Speaker 2 : Yes. Look at that. I have just been into the bank.
Speaker 1 : Torvald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t sound so suspicious! I was merely going to ask you how I looked!


Speaker 2 : If your little squirrel were to ask you for something very, very prettily.?
Speaker 1 : What then?
Speaker 2 : Would you do it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. You wouldn’t just do anything I ask!


Speaker 1 : Your squirrel would run about and do all her tricks if you would be nice, and do what she wants.
Speaker 2 : Speak plainly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh squirrel, don’t be afraid to speak your mind


Speaker 1 : Well, my skylark does that anyhow.
Speaker 2 : I would play the fairy and dance for you in the moonlight, Torvald.
Speaker 1 : Nora.you surely don't mean that request you made to me this morning?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your earnest begging really is making me consider your request.


Speaker 2 : Have you really the courage to open up that question again?
Speaker 1 : Yes, dear, you must do as I ask; you must let Krogstad keep his post in the bank.
Speaker 2 : My dear Nora, it is his post that I have arranged Mrs Linde shall have.
Speaker 1 : Yes, you have been awfully kind about that; but you could just as well dismiss some other clerk instead of Krogstad.
Speaker 2 : This is simply incredible obstinacy! Because you chose to give him a thoughtless promise that you would speak for him, I am expected to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no my dear nora. Don’t be frightened of anything, when I am right here.


Speaker 1 : Ah, I understand; it is recollections of the past that scare you.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean?
Speaker 1 : Naturally you are thinking of your father.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I completely understand where you are coming from. Please don’t loose your cool over this.


Speaker 2 : My little Nora, there is an important difference between your father and me. Your father's reputation as a public official was not above suspicion. Mine is, and I hope it will continue to be so, as long as I hold my office.
Speaker 1 : You never can tell what mischief these men may contrive. We ought to be so well off, so snug and happy here in our peaceful home, and have no cares.you and I and the children, Torvald! That is why I beg you so earnestly.
Speaker 2 : And it is just by interceding for him that you make it impossible for me to keep him. It is already known at the Bank that I mean to dismiss Krogstad. Is it to get about now that the new manager has changed his mind at his wife's bidding.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. Please try to understand that I can not change an official decision just because of my wife.


Speaker 1 : Of course!.if only this obstinate little person can get her way! Do you suppose I am going to make myself ridiculous before my whole staff, to let people think that I am a man to be swayed by all sorts of outside influence? I should very soon feel the consequences of it, I can tell you! And besides, there is one thing that makes it quite impossible for me to have Krogstad in the Bank as long as I am manager.
Speaker 2 : Whatever is that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be down because of that. I am sure you have done your best! Come on! Cheer up now!


Speaker 1 : Yes, you could.couldn't you?
Speaker 2 : And I hear he is a good worker, too. But I knew him when we were boys. It was one of those rash friendships that so often prove an incubus in afterlife. I may as well tell you plainly, we were once on very intimate terms with one another. But this tactless fellow lays no restraint on himself when other people are present. On the contrary, he thinks it gives him the right to adopt a familiar tone with me, and every minute it is “I say, Helmer, old fellow!” and that sort of thing. I assure you it is extremely painful for me. He would make my position in the Bank intolerable.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to raise your temper but I have seen him first hand. Anyways its all office work.


Speaker 1 : Don't you? Why not?
Speaker 2 : Because it is such a narrow-minded way of looking at things.
Speaker 1 : What are you saying? Narrow-minded? Do you think I am narrow-minded?
Speaker 2 : No, just the opposite, dear.and it is exactly for that reason.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : dear, I dint mean to upset you. All I ask is for you to keep an open mind in his regard. I don’t wish to call you narrow-minded only to consider his opinion as well


Speaker 1 : Torvald.what was that letter?
Speaker 2 : Krogstad's dismissal.
Speaker 1 : Call her back, Torvald! There is still time. Oh Torvald, call her back! Do it for my sake.for your own sake.for the children's sake! Do you hear me, Torvald? Call her back! You don't know what that letter can bring upon us.
Speaker 2 : It's too late.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh Torvald! Its okay! Whats done is done. Lets forget about the letter


Speaker 1 : My dear Nora, I can forgive the anxiety you are in, although really it is an insult to me. It is, indeed. Isn't it an insult to think that I should be afraid of a starving quill-driver's vengeance? But I forgive you nevertheless, because it is such eloquent witness to your great love for me. And that is as it should be, my own darling Nora. Come what will, you may be sure I shall have both courage and strength if they be needed. You will see I am man enough to take everything upon myself.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean by that?
Speaker 1 : Everything, I say.
Speaker 2 : You will never have to do that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry! I shall send rank to you when he gets here.


Speaker 1 : And you?
Speaker 2 : Oh, you know very well I always have time for you.
Speaker 1 : Thank you. I shall make use of as much of it as I can.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean by that? As much of it as you can?
Speaker 1 : Well, does that alarm you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! there is nothing to fear. 


Speaker 2 : Nothing but what I have long been prepared for. But I certainly didn't expect it to happen so soon.
Speaker 1 : What have you found out? Doctor Rank, you must tell me.
Speaker 2 : It is all up with me. And it can't be helped.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! It has nothing to do so don’t loose your cool.


Speaker 1 : Who else? It is no use lying to one's self. I am the most wretched of all my patients, Mrs Helmer. Lately I have been taking stock of my internal economy. Bankrupt! Probably within a month I shall lie rotting in the churchyard.
Speaker 2 : What an ugly thing to say!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so upset about that. I am sure it will all work out for you in the end.


Speaker 1 : Oh, but, Doctor Rank.
Speaker 2 : I won't have him there. Not on any account. I bar my door to him. As soon as I am quite certain that the worst has come, I shall send you my card with a black cross on it, and then you will know that the loathsome end has begun.
Speaker 1 : You are quite absurd today. And I wanted you so much to be in a really good humour.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I dint mean to anger you! I understand you are in a fix right now.


Speaker 2 : Rubbish! Do talk of something cheerful.
Speaker 1 : Oh, it's a mere laughing matter, the whole thing. My poor innocent spine has to suffer for my father's youthful amusements.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Exactly!


Speaker 2 : Yes, and to truffles.
Speaker 1 : Truffles, yes. And oysters too, I suppose?
Speaker 2 : Oysters, of course, that goes without saying.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I completely agree with you on this regard. But I suppose we take these things knowing the risks


Speaker 1 : Especially that they should revenge themselves on the unlucky bones of those who have not had the satisfaction of enjoying them.
Speaker 2 : Yes, that's the saddest part of it all.
Speaker 1 : Hm!.
Speaker 2 : Why did you smile?
Speaker 1 : No, it was you that laughed.
Speaker 2 : No, it was you that smiled, Doctor Rank!
Speaker 1 : You are a greater rascal than I thought.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I can see that. 


Speaker 2 : So it seems.
Speaker 1 : Dear, dear Doctor Rank, death mustn't take you away from Torvald and me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no way! Me and torvald will miss you dearly. But that’s to say if death takes you away from us. Lets be positive


Speaker 2 : Do you believe that?
Speaker 1 : People form new ties, and then.
Speaker 2 : Who will form new ties?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh mrs linde was just here to see me after a long time


Speaker 1 : Oho!.you don't mean to say you are jealous of poor Christine?
Speaker 2 : Yes, I am. She will be my successor in this house. When I am done for, this woman will.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I had no idea. I apologize for being so inconsiderate.


Speaker 1 : Today again. There, you see.
Speaker 2 : She has only come to sew my dress for me. Bless my soul, how unreasonable you are! Be nice now, Doctor Rank, and tomorrow you will see how beautifully I shall dance, and you can imagine I am doing it all for you.and for Torvald too, of course. Doctor Rank, come and sit down here, and I will show you something.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t look so upset! Its something new that I bought


Speaker 1 : Just look at those!
Speaker 2 : Silk stockings.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just lovely. These will look great on you.


Speaker 1 : Hm!.
Speaker 2 : Why are you looking so critical? Don't you think they will fit me?
Speaker 1 : I have no means of forming an opinion about that.
Speaker 2 : For shame! That's to punish you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that great that you wish to see more! Let me see what else are you allowed to see!


Speaker 1 : Not a single thing more, for being so naughty.
Speaker 2 : When I am sitting here, talking to you as intimately as this, I cannot imagine for a moment what would have become of me if I had never come into this house.
Speaker 1 : I believe you do feel thoroughly at home with us.
Speaker 2 : And to be obliged to leave it all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you positivity in such situations


Speaker 1 : And not be able to leave behind one the slightest token of one's gratitude, scarcely even a fleeting regret.nothing but an empty place which the first comer can fill as well as any other.
Speaker 2 : And if I asked you now for a.? No!
Speaker 1 : For what?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course! Go ahead.


Speaker 2 : Yes, yes!
Speaker 1 : I mean a tremendously big favour.
Speaker 2 : Would you really make me so happy for once?
Speaker 1 : Ah, but you don't know what it is yet.
Speaker 2 : No.but tell me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : come on! Tell me I will sure to give you my advice, help and favour


Speaker 1 : The bigger a thing it is the better. I can't conceive what it is you mean. Do tell me. Haven't I your confidence?
Speaker 2 : More than anyone else. I know you are my truest and best friend, and so I will tell you what it is. Well, Doctor Rank, it is something you must help me to prevent. You know how devotedly, how inexpressibly deeply Torvald loves me; he would never for a moment hesitate to give his life for me.
Speaker 1 : Nora.do you think he is the only one.?
Speaker 2 : The only one.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : aww! That just makes me so happy! I wouldn’t want anyone to give their life for my sake though


Speaker 1 : Is that it?
Speaker 2 : I was determined you should know it before I went away, and there will never be a better opportunity than this. Now you know it, Nora. And now you know, too, that you can trust me as you would trust no one else.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t get upset! I just have to get something first.


Speaker 1 : Nora!
Speaker 2 : Helen, bring in the lamp. Dear Doctor Rank, that was really horrid of you.
Speaker 1 : To have loved you as much as anyone else does? Was that horrid?
Speaker 2 : No, but to go and tell me so. There was really no need.
Speaker 1 : What do you mean? Did you know.? Nora.Mrs Helmer.tell me, had you any idea of this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I deeply and sincerely apologize. I dint mean to upset. I was merely expressing myself. I only wanted you to know how I feel.


Speaker 2 : Well, at all events you know now that you can command me, body and soul. So won't you speak out?
Speaker 1 : After what happened?
Speaker 2 : I beg you to let me know what it is.
Speaker 1 : I can't tell you anything now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose your cool now. I will tell you in time about anything you could do for me.


Speaker 2 : You can do nothing for me now. Besides, I really don't need any help at all. You will find that the whole thing is merely fancy on my part. It really is so.of course it is! You are a nice sort of man, Doctor Rank!.don't you feel ashamed of yourself, now the lamp has come?
Speaker 1 : Not a bit. But perhaps I had better go.for ever?
Speaker 2 : No, indeed, you shall not. Of course you must come here just as before. You know very well Torvald can't do without you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to sound rude but it would be wrong to give you false expectations. I would be fine on my own.


Speaker 1 : Oh, I am always tremendously pleased when you come.
Speaker 2 : It is just that, that put me on the wrong track. You are a riddle to me. I have often thought that you would almost as soon be in my company as in Helmer's.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was lovely how you said it.


Speaker 1 : Yes, there is something in that.
Speaker 2 : When I was at home, of course I loved papa best. But I always thought it tremendous fun if I could steal down into the maids' room, because they never moralised at all, and talked to each other about such entertaining things.
Speaker 1 : I see.it is their place I have taken.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if that pleases you I shall continue doing it.


Speaker 2 : Is there anything wrong?
Speaker 1 : No, no, not in the least. It is only something.it is my new dress.
Speaker 2 : What? Your dress is lying there.
Speaker 1 : Oh, yes, that one; but this is another. I ordered it. Torvald mustn't know about it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that was the great secret.


Speaker 2 : Yes; he came up the back stairs.
Speaker 1 : But didn't you tell him no one was in?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure it will be good later on


Speaker 2 : He won't go away?
Speaker 1 : No; he says he won't until he has seen you, ma'am.
Speaker 2 : Well, let him come in.but quietly. Helen, you mustn't say anything about it to anyone. It is a surprise for my husband.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you do. Thank you for helping me


Speaker 1 : No matter about that.
Speaker 2 : What do you want of me?
Speaker 1 : An explanation of something.
Speaker 2 : Make haste then. What is it?
Speaker 1 : You know, I suppose, that I have got my dismissal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well atleast you tried! 


Speaker 2 : Does your husband love you so little, then? He knows what I can expose you to, and yet he ventures.
Speaker 1 : How can you suppose that he has any knowledge of the sort?
Speaker 2 : I didn't suppose so at all. It would not be the least like our dear Torvald Helmer to show so much courage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to be offensive. I am sorry it came out like that. I am just a little on edge today.


Speaker 1 : Certainly.all the respect he deserves. But since you have kept the matter so carefully to yourself, I make bold to suppose that you have a little clearer idea, than you had yesterday, of what it actually is that you have done?
Speaker 2 : More than you could ever teach me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. I am just a little stressed out already about what you might teach me. 


Speaker 1 : What is it you want of me?
Speaker 2 : Only to see how you were, Mrs Helmer. I have been thinking about you all day long. A mere cashier, a quill-driver, a.well, a man like me.even he has a little of what is called feeling, you know.
Speaker 1 : Show it, then; think of my little children.
Speaker 2 : Have you and your husband thought of mine? But never mind about that. I only wanted to tell you that you need not take this matter too seriously. In the first place there will be no accusation made on my part.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad we are on the same page in this front


Speaker 1 : The whole thing can be arranged amicably; there is no reason why anyone should know anything about it. It will remain a secret between us three.
Speaker 2 : My husband must never get to know anything about it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely! That’s why it would be good if we finish it up without my husband knowing of it.


Speaker 1 : No, not just at present.
Speaker 2 : Or perhaps that you have some expedient for raising the money soon?
Speaker 1 : No expedient that I mean to make use of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s so good to hear! I thought money could win anyone over.


Speaker 2 : Tell me what purpose you mean to put it to.
Speaker 1 : I shall only preserve it.keep it in my possession. No one who is not concerned in the matter shall have the slightest hint of it. So that if the thought of it has driven you to any desperate resolution.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : If you had it in your mind to run away from your home.
Speaker 1 : I had.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no not at all! I wouldn’t want this situation to get any worse.


Speaker 2 : How could you know that?
Speaker 1 : Give up the idea.
Speaker 2 : How did you know I had thought of that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you dint think of anything bad


Speaker 1 : No more had I.
Speaker 2 : No, that's it, isn't it.you hadn't the courage either?
Speaker 1 : No, I haven't.I haven't.
Speaker 2 : Besides, it would have been a great piece of folly. Once the first storm at home is over.. I have a letter for your husband in my pocket.
Speaker 1 : Telling him everything?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good you could pile up the courage to write it down for my husband


Speaker 2 : He mustn't get the letter. Tear it up. I will find some means of getting money.
Speaker 1 : Excuse me, Mrs Helmer, but I think I told you just now.
Speaker 2 : I am not speaking of what I owe you. Tell me what sum you are asking my husband for, and I will get the money.
Speaker 1 : I am not asking your husband for a penny.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry mrs helmer. I only intent to make my life better given my current situation. I hope you can understand that.


Speaker 2 : I will tell you. I want to rehabilitate myself, Mrs Helmer; I want to get on; and in that your husband must help me. For the last year and a half I have not had a hand in anything dishonourable, amid all that time I have been struggling in most restricted circumstances. I was content to work my way up step by step. Now I am turned out, and I am not going to be satisfied with merely being taken into favour again. I want to get on, I tell you. I want to get into the Bank again, in a higher position. Your husband must make a place for me.
Speaker 1 : That he will never do!
Speaker 2 : He will; I know him; he dare not protest. And as soon as I am in there again with him, then you will see! Within a year I shall be the manager's right hand. It will be Nils Krogstad and not Torvald Helmer who manages the Bank.
Speaker 1 : That's a thing you will never see!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to offend you but I hope to see it


Speaker 2 : I have courage enough for it now.
Speaker 1 : Oh, you can't frighten me. A fine, spoilt lady like you.
Speaker 2 : You will see, you will see.
Speaker 1 : Under the ice, perhaps? Down into the cold, coal-black water? And then, in the spring, to float up to the surface, all horrible and unrecognisable, with your hair fallen out.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I sincerely apologize. I never meant to frighten you. I was just voicing my thoughts but I can see it has taken the wrong meaning.


Speaker 2 : There, I can't see anything more to mend now. Would you like to try it on.?
Speaker 1 : Christine, come here.
Speaker 2 : What is the matter with you? You look so agitated!
Speaker 1 : Come here. Do you see that letter? There, look.you can see it through the glass in the letter-box.
Speaker 2 : Yes, I see it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Don’t be so upset about it. I am sure it is just Korgstad writing to catch up. Calm down, please!


Speaker 1 : Nora.it was Krogstad who lent you the money!
Speaker 2 : Yes, and now Torvald will know all about it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you sure? Okay If you say so.


Speaker 1 : You don't know all. I forged a name.
Speaker 2 : Good heavens.!
Speaker 1 : I only want to say this to you, Christine.you must be my witness.
Speaker 2 : Your witness? What do you mean? What am I to.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey come on! You wont go out of your mind. Just try and calm down


Speaker 1 : Nora!
Speaker 2 : Or if anything else should happen to me.anything, for instance, that might prevent my being here.
Speaker 1 : Nora! Nora! you are quite out of your mind.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand nore. Please calm down. You being sad is not going to help your cause.


Speaker 2 : Yes, yes.but how can you suppose.?
Speaker 1 : Then you must be my witness, that it is not true, Christine. I am not out of my mind at all; I am in my right senses now, and I tell you no one else has known anything about it; I, and I alone, did the whole thing. Remember that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its okay if you wont. I shall explain it you soon.


Speaker 2 : How should you understand it? A wonderful thing is going to happen!
Speaker 1 : A wonderful thing?
Speaker 2 : Yes, a wonderful thing!.But it is so terrible, Christine; it mustn't happen, not for all the world.
Speaker 1 : I will go at once and see Krogstad.
Speaker 2 : Don't go to him; he will do you some harm.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s so lovely to hear. Krogstad really is very caring.


Speaker 1 : He?
Speaker 2 : Where does he live?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear calm down! I am sure the letter is a good thing right now.


Speaker 1 : Nora!
Speaker 2 : Oh, what's that? What do you want?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You scared me! but don’t worry I am just trying the dress.


Speaker 1 : Well? May I venture at last to come into my own room again? Come along, Rank, now you will see. But what is this?
Speaker 2 : What is what, dear?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes rank is right! The transformation is just gonna take some time.


Speaker 1 : But, my dear Nora, you look so worn out. Have you been practising too much?
Speaker 2 : No, I have not practised at all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok my dear. Please don’t get upset over it. I will make sure I practise a lot


Speaker 1 : Yes, indeed I shall, Torvald. But I can't get on a bit without you to help me; I have absolutely forgotten the whole thing.
Speaker 2 : Oh, we will soon work it up again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes absolutely. Why fear about that so much. If you wish no business for me today, I would gladly comply.


Speaker 1 : I promise. This evening I will be wholly and absolutely at your service, you helpless little mortal. Ah, by the way, first of all I will just.
Speaker 2 : What are you going to do there?
Speaker 1 : Only see if any letters have come.
Speaker 2 : No, no! don't do that, Torvald!
Speaker 1 : Why not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay okay! Please calm down. I trust you. I wont look for letters. Just don’t get angry about it.


Speaker 2 : Well, let me look. Aha!
Speaker 1 : I can't dance tomorrow if I don't practise with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no my dear. Please don’t get scared by my reactions. I am just excited about it.


Speaker 2 : Yes, so dreadfully afraid of it. Let me practise at once; there is time now, before we go to dinner. Sit down and play for me, Torvald dear; criticise me, and correct me as you play.
Speaker 1 : With great pleasure, if you wish me to.
Speaker 2 : Now play for me! I am going to dance!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant seem to stop scaring you. Okay I will go slower if you wish it.


Speaker 1 : My dear darling Nora, you are dancing as if your life depended on it.
Speaker 2 : So it does.
Speaker 1 : Stop, Rank; this is sheer madness. Stop, I tell you! I could never have believed it. You have forgotten everything I taught you.
Speaker 2 : There, you see.
Speaker 1 : You will want a lot of coaching.
Speaker 2 : Yes, you see how much I need it. You must coach me up to the last minute. Promise me that, Torvald!
Speaker 1 : You can depend on me.
Speaker 2 : You must not think of anything but me, either today or tomorrow; you mustn't open a single letter.not even open the letter-box.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : seems as though I am but I don’t mean to scare you too. Forget it. Lets just dance and you can keep coaching me.


Speaker 1 : Then you will be free.
Speaker 2 : Dinner is served, ma'am.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Sure sir. I will get it right away.


Speaker 1 : Hullo!.are we going to have a banquet?
Speaker 2 : Yes, a champagne banquet until the small hours. And a few macaroons, Helen.lots, just for once!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. I will always be your little skylark


Speaker 1 : Well!
Speaker 2 : Gone out of town.
Speaker 1 : I could tell from your face.
Speaker 2 : He is coming home tomorrow evening. I wrote a note for him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are probably right. A wonderful thing is indeed going to happen


Speaker 1 : Not yet.and the time is nearly up. If only he does not.. Ah, there he is. Come in. There is no one here.
Speaker 2 : I found a note from you at home. What does this mean?
Speaker 1 : It is absolutely necessary that I should have a talk with you.
Speaker 2 : Really? And is it absolutely necessary that it should be here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay okay don’t be so scared. I understand you wanted to talk in private. Tell me what it is.


Speaker 1 : Are the Helmers really at a dance tonight?
Speaker 2 : Yes, why not?
Speaker 1 : Certainly.why not?
Speaker 2 : Now, Nils, let us have a talk.
Speaker 1 : Can we two have anything to talk about?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really! Lets get started right away then!


Speaker 2 : I shouldn't have thought so.
Speaker 1 : No, you have never properly understood me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try and understand me. I am really sorry for all my wrong doings in the past.


Speaker 2 : Do you believe I am as absolutely heartless as all that? And do you believe that I did it with a light heart?
Speaker 1 : Didn't you?
Speaker 2 : Nils, did you really think that?
Speaker 1 : If it were as you say, why did you write to me as you did at the time?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Please don’t dwell on the past and feel bad. Lets move on.


Speaker 2 : So that was it. And all this.only for the sake of money!
Speaker 1 : You must not forget that I had a helpless mother and two little brothers. We couldn't wait for you, Nils; your prospects seemed hopeless then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know. I am sincerely sorry for all my wrong doings in the past. Could you finf it in youorself to forgive me?


Speaker 2 : Indeed I don't know. Many a time did I ask myself if I had the right to do it.
Speaker 1 : When I lost you, it was as if all the solid ground went from under my feet. Look at me now.I am a shipwrecked man clinging to a bit of wreckage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : see you have nothing fear anymore. Like ypu said, help is near by


Speaker 2 : It was near; but then you came and stood in my way.
Speaker 1 : Unintentionally, Nils. It was only today that I learned it was your place I was going to take in the Bank.
Speaker 2 : I believe you, if you say so. But now that you know it, are you not going to give it up to me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am just glad to see you care enough for my benefit.


Speaker 1 : Oh, benefit, benefit.I would have done it whether or no.
Speaker 2 : I have learned to act prudently. Life, and hard, bitter necessity have taught me that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a great thought! I am glad you are able to put that in the way you lead your life.


Speaker 1 : Then life has taught you something very reasonable. But deeds you must believe in?
Speaker 2 : What do you mean by that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was just a figure of speech. Please don’t be scared because of that.


Speaker 1 : I had good reason to say so.
Speaker 2 : Well, I am like a shipwrecked woman clinging to some wreckage.no one to mourn for, no one to care for.
Speaker 1 : It was your own choice.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok I understand. I hope that’s not the case anymore.


Speaker 2 : Well, what now?
Speaker 1 : Nils, how would it be if we two shipwrecked people could join forces?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mea to startle you. I just meant if you would like to work together to get a similar goal.


Speaker 2 : Two on the same piece of wreckage would stand a better chance than each on their own.
Speaker 1 : Christine I...
Speaker 2 : What do you suppose brought me to town?
Speaker 1 : Do you mean that you gave me a thought?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sad anymore. It makes me happy to think you came back for me. 


Speaker 2 : I don't trust that. It is nothing but a woman's overstrained sense of generosity that prompts you to make such an offer of yourself.
Speaker 1 : Have you ever noticed anything of the sort in me?
Speaker 2 : Could you really do it? Tell me.do you know all about my past life?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. As long as your decision has all the background information needed.


Speaker 1 : And do you know what they think of me here?
Speaker 2 : You seemed to me to imply that with me you might have been quite another man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are a great man. 


Speaker 1 : Is it too late now?
Speaker 2 : Christine, are you saying this deliberately? Yes, I am sure you are. I see it in your face. Have you really the courage, then.?
Speaker 1 : I want to be a mother to someone, and your children need a mother. We two need each other. Nils, I have faith in your real character.I can dare anything together with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I need to thank you for saying yes! 


Speaker 2 : Hush! The Tarantella! Go, go!
Speaker 1 : Why? What is it?
Speaker 2 : Do you hear them up there? When that is over, we may expect them back.
Speaker 1 : Yes, yes.I will go. But it is all no use. Of course you are not aware what steps I have taken in the matter of the Helmers.
Speaker 2 : Yes, I know all about that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. I will be with you in this journey.


Speaker 1 : I understand very well to what lengths a man like you might be driven by despair.
Speaker 2 : If I could only undo what I have done!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets keep our heads calm and figure out a solution together.


Speaker 1 : Are you sure of that?
Speaker 2 : Quite sure, but.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I would never hurt you to save my friend. Please don’t misunderstand me.


Speaker 1 : Nils, a woman who has once sold herself for another's sake, doesn't do it a second time.
Speaker 2 : I will ask for my letter back.
Speaker 1 : No, no.
Speaker 2 : Yes, of course I will. I will wait here until Helmer comes; I will tell him he must give me my letter back.that it only concerns my dismissal.that he is not to read it.
Speaker 1 : No, Nils, you must not recall your letter.
Speaker 2 : But, tell me, wasn't it for that very purpose that you asked me to meet you here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well maybe you are right. Let him read the letter and uncover the truth.


Speaker 1 : Very well, if you will take the responsibility. But there is one thing I can do in any case, and I shall do it at once.
Speaker 2 : You must be quick and go! The dance is over; we are not safe a moment longer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! I wont be long.


Speaker 1 : Yes, do. You must see me back to my door...
Speaker 2 : I have never had such an amazing piece of good fortune in my life!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Go ut on your things and get ready


Speaker 1 : No, no, no!.don't take me in. I want to go upstairs again; I don't want to leave so early.
Speaker 2 : But, my dearest Nora.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dearest nora. Of course you can stay an hor more.


Speaker 1 : Yes, take a good look at her. I think she is worth looking at. Isn't she charming, Mrs Linde?
Speaker 2 : Yes, indeed she is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to see you had a great time.


Speaker 1 : I have had a talk with him.
Speaker 2 : Yes, and.
Speaker 1 : Nora, you must tell your husband all about it.
Speaker 2 : I knew it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am scared of what my husband might say but yes I  understand your point.


Speaker 1 : I won't tell him.
Speaker 2 : Then the letter will.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I just hope you make the right choice.


Speaker 1 : Well, Mrs Linde, have you admired her?
Speaker 2 : Yes, and now I will say goodnight.
Speaker 1 : What, already? Is this yours, this knitting?
Speaker 2 : Yes, thank you, I had very nearly forgotten it.
Speaker 1 : So you knit?
Speaker 2 : Of course.
Speaker 1 : Do you know, you ought to embroider.
Speaker 2 : Really? Why?
Speaker 1 : Yes, it's far more becoming. Let me show you. You hold the embroidery thus in your left hand, and use the needle with the right.like this.with a long, easy sweep. Do you see?
Speaker 2 : Yes, perhaps.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you liked the champagne. Lets talk about embroidery some other day


Speaker 1 : Well,.goodnight, Nora, and don't be self-willed any more.
Speaker 2 : That's right, Mrs Linde.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good night mrs linde


Speaker 1 : Aren't you very tired, Torvald?
Speaker 2 : No, not in the least.
Speaker 1 : Nor sleepy?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I must have over worked myself today.


Speaker 2 : Yes, I am very tired. I want to go to sleep at once.
Speaker 1 : There, you see it was quite right of me not to let you stay there any longer.
Speaker 2 : Everything you do is quite right, Torvald.
Speaker 1 : Now my little skylark is speaking reasonably. Did you notice what good spirits Rank was in this evening?
Speaker 2 : Really? Was he? I didn't speak to him at all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely. We can spend some quality time by ourselves.


Speaker 1 : Don't look at me like that, Torvald.
Speaker 2 : Why shouldn't I look at my dearest treasure?.at all the beauty that is mine, all my very own?
Speaker 1 : You mustn't say things like that to me tonight.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! The guests really have started to go.


Speaker 2 : It is I. May I come in for a moment?
Speaker 1 : Oh, what does he want now? Wait a minute! Come, that's kind of you not to pass by our door.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes come in. we were trying to rest for a bit.


Speaker 2 : It seems to me that you looked after yourself pretty well upstairs too.
Speaker 1 : Excellently. Why shouldn't I? Why shouldn't one enjoy everything in this world?.at any rate as much as one can, and as long as one can. The wine was capital.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. It was exquisite


Speaker 2 : Torvald drank a great deal of champagne tonight too.
Speaker 1 : Did he?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. He does look great right now.


Speaker 2 : Indeed you may.
Speaker 1 : Was it favourable, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad it worked out for everyone


Speaker 2 : Doctor Rank.are you fond of fancy-dress balls?
Speaker 1 : Yes, if there is a fine lot of pretty costumes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh whatever you wish to. You will look great


Speaker 2 : Little featherbrain!.are you thinking of the next already?
Speaker 1 : We two? Yes, I can tell you. You shall go as a good fairy.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but what do you suggest as an appropriate costume for that?
Speaker 1 : Let your wife go dressed just as she is in everyday life.
Speaker 2 : That was really very prettily turned. But can't you tell us what you will be?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really! Do tell us.


Speaker 1 : Well?
Speaker 2 : At the next fancy-dress ball I shall be invisible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thanks! I intended to lighten up the mood


Speaker 1 : There is a big black hat.have you never heard of hats that make you invisible? If you put one on, no one can see you.
Speaker 2 : Yes, you are quite right.
Speaker 1 : But I am clean forgetting what I came for. Helmer, give me a cigar.one of the dark Havanas.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thanks, lets enjoy a little cigar time


Speaker 2 : Thank you for that wish.
Speaker 1 : Wish me the same.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are more than welcome


Speaker 2 : He has drunk more than he ought.
Speaker 1 : Maybe. Torvald! what are you going to do there?
Speaker 2 : Emptying the letter-box; it is quite full; there will be no room to put the newspaper in tomorrow morning.
Speaker 1 : Are you going to work tonight?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t panic. I am sure it must be in your head.


Speaker 2 : At the lock.?
Speaker 1 : Yes, someone has. What can it mean? I should never have thought the maid.. Here is a broken hairpin. Nora, it is one of yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : these kids! Lets calm our heads down and have a talk with them later.


Speaker 2 : Then you must get them out of those ways. There, at last I have got it open. Helen!.Helen, put out the light over the front door. Look at that.look what a heap of them there are. What on earth is that?
Speaker 1 : The letter.No! Torvald, no!
Speaker 2 : Two cards.of Rank's.
Speaker 1 : Of Doctor Rank's?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes probably. Lets meet him tomorrow and sort it out


Speaker 2 : Is there anything written on them?
Speaker 1 : There is a black cross over the name. Look there.what an uncomfortable idea! It looks as if he were announcing his own death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t panic. Lets handle this situation carefully.


Speaker 2 : What? Do you know anything about it? Has he said anything to you?
Speaker 1 : Yes. He told me that when the cards came it would be his leave-taking from us. He means to shut himself up and die.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : whatever helps him cope in his pain. We shouldn’t be judgemental


Speaker 2 : If it has to happen, it is best it should be without a word.don't you think so, Torvald?
Speaker 1 : He had so grown into our lives. I can't think of him as having gone out of them. He, with his sufferings and his loneliness, was like a cloudy background to our sunlit happiness. Well, perhaps it is best so. For him, anyway. And perhaps for us too, Nora. We two are thrown quite upon each other now. My darling wife, I don't feel as if I could hold you tight enough. Do you know, Nora, I have often wished that you might be threatened by some great danger, so that I might risk my life's blood, and everything, for your sake.
Speaker 2 : Now you must read your letters, Torvald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : time with me can wait. I am right here. Your friend needs you more at this moment


Speaker 1 : With the thought of your friend's death.
Speaker 2 : You are right, it has affected us both. Something ugly has come between us.the thought of the horrors of death. We must try and rid our minds of that. Until then.we will each go to our own room.
Speaker 1 : Goodnight, Torvald.Goodnight!
Speaker 2 : Goodnight, my little singing-bird. Sleep sound, Nora. Now I will read my letters through.
Speaker 1 : Never to see him again. Never! Never! Never to see my children again either.never again. Never! Never!.Ah! the icy, black water.the unfathomable depths.If only it were over! He has got it now.now he is reading it. Goodbye, Torvald and my children!
Speaker 2 : Nora!
Speaker 1 : Ah!.
Speaker 2 : What is this? Do you know what is in this letter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nora don’t panic. I will let you go but calm down first please!


Speaker 1 : Where are you going?
Speaker 2 : You shan't save me, Torvald!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I deeply apologize for the greive I have caused you. It wasn’t my intention


Speaker 1 : It is true. I have loved you above everything else in the world.
Speaker 2 : Oh, don't let us have any silly excuses.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to call you love a silly excuse but I am currently not in the state of mind to be understanding. I hope we can talk later about this.


Speaker 1 : Miserable creature.what have you done?
Speaker 2 : Let me go. You shall not suffer for my sake. You shall not take it upon yourself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I completely understand my fault. I should have ever done that or lied to you


Speaker 1 : Yes, now I am beginning to understand thoroughly.
Speaker 2 : What a horrible awakening! All these eight years.she who was my joy and pride.a hypocrite, a liar.worse, worse.a criminal! The unutterable ugliness of it all!.For shame! For shame! I ought to have suspected that something of the sort would happen. I ought to have foreseen it. All your father's want of principle.be silent!.all your father's want of principle has come out in you. No religion, no morality, no sense of duty.. How I am punished for having winked at what he did! I did it for your sake, and this is how you repay me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are very angry right now but can you please try to understand my side?


Speaker 1 : Now you have destroyed all my happiness. You have ruined all my future. It is horrible to think of! I am in the power of an unscrupulous man; he can do what he likes with me, ask anything he likes of me, give me any orders he pleases.I dare not refuse. And I must sink to such miserable depths because of a thoughtless woman!
Speaker 2 : When I am out of the way, you will be free.
Speaker 1 : No fine speeches, please. Your father had always plenty of those ready, too. What good would it be to me if you were out of the way, as you say? Not the slightest. He can make the affair known everywhere; and if he does, I may be falsely suspected of having been a party to your criminal action. Very likely people will think I was behind it all.that it was I who prompted you! And I have to thank you for all this.you whom I have cherished during the whole of our married life. Do you understand now what it is you have done for me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant believe this has happened. I hope we find a way past this


Speaker 2 : Yes, read it.
Speaker 1 : I scarcely have the courage to do it. It may mean ruin for both of us. No, I must know. Nora! Nora!.No, I must read it once again.. Yes, it is true! I am saved! Nora, I am saved!
Speaker 2 : And I?
Speaker 1 : You too, of course; we are both saved, both you and I. Look, he sends you your bond back. He says he regrets and repents.that a happy change in his life.never mind what he says! We are saved, Nora! No one can do anything to you. Oh, Nora, Nora!.no, first I must destroy these hateful things. Let me see.. No, no, I won't look at it. The whole thing shall be nothing but a bad dream to me. There.now it doesn't exist any longer. He says that since Christmas Eve you.. These must have been three dreadful days for you, Nora.
Speaker 2 : I have fought a hard fight these three days.
Speaker 1 : And suffered agonies, and seen no way out but.. No, we won't call any of the horrors to mind. We will only shout with joy, and keep saying, “It's all over! It's all over!” Listen to me, Nora. You don't seem to realise that it is all over. What is this?.such a cold, set face! My poor little Nora, I quite understand; you don't feel as if you could believe that I have forgiven you. But it is true, Nora, I swear it; I have forgiven you everything. I know that what you did, you did out of love for me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have burst out on you like that. I lost my cool for a while there. I hope things are better between us now.


Speaker 2 : You have loved me as a wife ought to love her husband. Only you had not sufficient knowledge to judge of the means you used. But do you suppose you are any the less dear to me, because you don't understand how to act on your own responsibility? No, no; only lean on me; I will advise you and direct you. I should not be a man if this womanly helplessness did not just give you a double attractiveness in my eyes. You must not think anymore about the hard things I said in my first moment of consternation, when I thought everything was going to overwhelm me. I have forgiven you, Nora; I swear to you I have forgiven you.
Speaker 1 : Thank you for your forgiveness.
Speaker 2 : No, don't go.. What are you doing in there?
Speaker 1 : Taking off my fancy dress.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I have changed my things now.


Speaker 2 : Yes, Torvald, I have changed my things now.
Speaker 1 : But what for?.so late as this.
Speaker 2 : I shall not sleep tonight.
Speaker 1 : But, my dear Nora.
Speaker 2 : It is not so very late. Sit down here, Torvald. You and I have much to say to one another.
Speaker 1 : Nora.what is this?.this cold, set face?
Speaker 2 : Sit down. It will take some time; I have a lot to talk over with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be alarmed. Its just the past and I want everything to clear up between us


Speaker 1 : No, that is just it. You don't understand me, and I have never understood you either.before tonight. No, you mustn't interrupt me. You must simply listen to what I say. Torvald, this is a settling of accounts.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean by that?
Speaker 1 : Isn't there one thing that strikes you as strange in our sitting here like this?
Speaker 2 : What is that?
Speaker 1 : We have been married now eight years. Does it not occur to you that this is the first time we two, you and I, husband and wife, have had a serious conversation?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : heart felt opinion on any topic.


Speaker 2 : In all these eight years.longer than that.from the very beginning of our acquaintance, we have never exchanged a word on any serious subject.
Speaker 1 : Was it likely that I would be continually and forever telling you about worries that you could not help me to bear?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right and we ought to do that from now on.


Speaker 2 : But, dearest Nora, would it have been any good to you?
Speaker 1 : That is just it; you have never understood me. I have been greatly wronged, Torvald.first by papa and then by you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t blame you both for loving me. It feels lovely to have ypu here. I meant that both of you have always sheltered me.


Speaker 2 : You have never loved me. You have only thought it pleasant to be in love with me.
Speaker 1 : Nora, what do I hear you saying?
Speaker 2 : It is perfectly true, Torvald. When I was at home with papa, he told me his opinion about everything, and so I had the same opinions; and if I differed from him I concealed the fact, because he would not have liked it. He called me his doll-child, and he played with me just as I used to play with my dolls. And when I came to live with you.
Speaker 1 : What sort of an expression is that to use about our marriage?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I had no idea you were going through so much in your head


Speaker 2 : How unreasonable and how ungrateful you are, Nora! Have you not been happy here?
Speaker 1 : No, I have never been happy. I thought I was, but it has never really been so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have hurt you but this is the truth.


Speaker 2 : No, only merry. And you have always been so kind to me. But our home has been nothing but a playroom. I have been your doll-wife, just as at home I was papa's doll-child; and here the children have been my dolls. I thought it great fun when you played with me, just as they thought it great fun when I played with them. That is what our marriage has been, Torvald.
Speaker 1 : There is some truth in what you say.exaggerated and strained as your view of it is. But for the future it shall be different. Playtime shall be over, and lesson-time shall begin.
Speaker 2 : Whose lessons? Mine, or the children's?
Speaker 1 : Both yours and the children's, my darling Nora.
Speaker 2 : Alas, Torvald, you are not the man to educate me into being a proper wife for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down torvald. I am merely trying to be honest with you.


Speaker 1 : And I.how am I fitted to bring up the children?
Speaker 2 : Nora!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh nora I dint mean in a derogatory manner. I was very angry at the time and lost my cool


Speaker 1 : In a moment of anger! Why do you pay any heed to that?
Speaker 2 : Indeed, you were perfectly right. I am not fit for the task. There is another task I must undertake first. I must try and educate myself.you are not the man to help me in that. I must do that for myself. And that is why I am going to leave you now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know it must be difficult to comprehend right now but try to understand me please!


Speaker 1 : I must stand quite alone, if I am to understand myself and everything about me. It is for that reason that I cannot remain with you any longer.
Speaker 2 : Nora, Nora!
Speaker 1 : I am going away from here now, at once. I am sure Christine will take me in for the night.
Speaker 2 : You are out of your mind! I won't allow it! I forbid you!
Speaker 1 : It is no use forbidding me anything any longer. I will take with me what belongs to myself. I will take nothing from you, either now or later.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry fro springing this on you right ot but try to understand my point.


Speaker 2 : Tomorrow I shall go home.I mean, to my old home. It will be easiest for me to find something to do there.
Speaker 1 : You blind, foolish woman!
Speaker 2 : I must try and get some sense, Torvald.
Speaker 1 : To desert your home, your husband and your children! And you don't consider what people will say!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t know what to say anymore but if you think this is the right thing to do then I wont stop you


Speaker 2 : It's shocking. This is how you would neglect your most sacred duties.
Speaker 1 : What do you consider my most sacred duties?
Speaker 2 : Do I need to tell you that? Are they not your duties to your husband and your children?
Speaker 1 : I have other duties just as sacred.
Speaker 2 : That you have not. What duties could those be?
Speaker 1 : Duties to myself.
Speaker 2 : Before all else, you are a wife and a mother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand it now. I am sorry to have misguided my anger. You should do what you think is right. I am here to support you


Speaker 1 : Can you not understand your place in your own home? Have you not a reliable guide in such matters as that?.have you no religion?
Speaker 2 : I am afraid, Torvald, I do not exactly know what religion is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am trying to get to know myself better at this moment and I hope you can support me in that.


Speaker 1 : I know nothing but what the clergyman said, when I went to be confirmed. He told us that religion was this, and that, and the other. When I am away from all this, and am alone, I will look into that matter too. I will see if what the clergyman said is true, or at all events if it is true for me.
Speaker 2 : This is unheard of in a girl of your age! But if religion cannot lead you aright, let me try and awaken your conscience. I suppose you have some moral sense? Or.answer me.am I to think you have none?
Speaker 1 : I assure you, Torvald, that is not an easy question to answer. I really don't know. The thing perplexes me altogether. I only know that you and I look at it in quite a different light. I am learning, too, that the law is quite another thing from what I supposed; but I find it impossible to convince myself that the law is right. According to it a woman has no right to spare her old dying father, or to save her husband's life. I can't believe that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I might not know now but I want to give myself a chance to do so. Please spit your anger and try to understand me.


Speaker 2 : No, I don't. But now I am going to try. I am going to see if I can make out who is right, the world or I.
Speaker 1 : You are ill, Nora; you are delirious; I almost think you are out of your mind.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if that makes you feel right then I wont stop you.


Speaker 2 : And is it with a clear and certain mind that you forsake your husband and your children?
Speaker 1 : Yes, it is.
Speaker 2 : Then there is only one possible explanation.
Speaker 1 : What is that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do love you and I am not forsaking you. All I need is some time


Speaker 2 : No, that is just it.
Speaker 1 : Nora!.and you can say that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well from all I have learnt I cant make anyone love me. So I respect your decision


Speaker 2 : Is that a clear and certain conviction too?
Speaker 1 : Yes, absolutely clear and certain. That is the reason why I will not stay here any longer.
Speaker 2 : And can you tell me what I have done to forfeit your love?
Speaker 1 : Yes, indeed I can. It was tonight, when the wonderful thing did not happen; then I saw you were not the man I had thought you were.
Speaker 2 : Explain yourself better. I don't understand you.
Speaker 1 : I have waited so patiently for eight years; for, goodness knows, I knew very well that wonderful things don't happen every day. Then this horrible misfortune came upon me; and then I felt quite certain that the wonderful thing was going to happen at last. When Krogstad's letter was lying out there, never for a moment did I imagine that you would consent to accept this man's conditions. I was so absolutely certain that you would say to him: Publish the thing to the whole world. And when that was done.
Speaker 2 : Yes, what then?.when I had exposed my wife to shame and disgrace?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am deeply sorry for all the pain I have caused you. I did not know I was doing you wrong. 


Speaker 1 : Nora.!
Speaker 2 : You mean that I would never have accepted such a sacrifice on your part? No, of course not. But what would my assurances have been worth against yours? That was the wonderful thing which I hoped for and feared; and it was to prevent that, that I wanted to kill myself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s where you are wrong but I understand your point because it may have been how you grew up. I don’t blame your thought


Speaker 1 : It is a thing hundreds of thousands of women have done.
Speaker 2 : Oh, you think and talk like a heedless child.
Speaker 1 : Maybe. But you neither think nor talk like the man I could bind myself to. As soon as your fear was over.and it was not fear for what threatened me, but for what might happen to you.when the whole thing was past, as far as you were concerned it was exactly as if nothing at all had happened. Exactly as before, I was your little skylark, your doll, which you would in future treat with doubly gentle care, because it was so brittle and fragile. Torvald.it was then it dawned upon me that for eight years I had been living here with a strange man, and had borne him three children.. Oh, I can't bear to think of it! I could tear myself into little bits!
Speaker 2 : I see, I see. An abyss has opened between us.there is no denying it. But, Nora, would it not be possible to fill it up?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sad, lets try to clear it up more and see if we can figure a solution out.


Speaker 1 : I have it in me to become a different man.
Speaker 2 : Perhaps.if your doll is taken away from you.
Speaker 1 : But to part!.to part from you! No, no, Nora, I can't understand that idea.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nora, I don’t like the idea but let me think about it. I am sure I will be able to wrap my mind around this.


Speaker 2 : Nora, Nora, not now! Wait until tomorrow.
Speaker 1 : I cannot spend the night in a strange man's room.
Speaker 2 : But can't we live here like brother and sister.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it will be painful for them to live without you.


Speaker 1 : But some day, Nora.some day?
Speaker 2 : How can I tell? I have no idea what is going to become of me.
Speaker 1 : But you are my wife, whatever becomes of you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is really painful and I can see how much it is hurting you too. Lets hope for a better future.


Speaker 2 : That too?
Speaker 1 : That too.
Speaker 2 : Here it is.
Speaker 1 : That's right. Now it is all over. I have put the keys here. The maids know all about everything in the house.better than I do. Tomorrow, after I have left her, Christine will come here and pack up my own things that I brought with me from home. I will have them sent after me.
Speaker 2 : All over! All over!.Nora, shall you never think of me again?
Speaker 1 : I know I shall often think of you, the children, and this house.
Speaker 2 : May I write to you, Nora?
Speaker 1 : No.never. You must not do that.
Speaker 2 : But at least let me send you.
Speaker 1 : Nothing.nothing.
Speaker 2 : Let me help you if you are in want.
Speaker 1 : No. I can receive nothing from a stranger.
Speaker 2 : Nora.can I never be anything more than a stranger to you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s sounds more positive than the current situation


Speaker 1 : Tell me what that would be!
Speaker 2 : Both you and I would have to be so changed that.. Oh, Torvald, I don't believe any longer in wonderful things happening.
Speaker 1 : But I will believe in it. Tell me! So changed that.?
Speaker 2 : That our life together would be a real wedlock. Goodbye.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good bye Torvald. Take care of yourself. Don’t look so dejected now. Lets head into this seperation with complete positivity.


Speaker 1 : You see, if you come an hour late, Mr. Billing, you have to put up with cold meat.
Speaker 2 : It is uncommonly good, thank you.remarkably good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your husband's punctuality is impecable


Speaker 1 : That doesn't affect me a bit. Indeed, I almost think I enjoy a meal all the better when I can sit down and eat all by myself, and undisturbed.
Speaker 2 : Oh well, as long as you are enjoying it.. I expect that is Mr. Hovstad coming too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good! The more the merrier


Speaker 1 : Good evening, Katherine.
Speaker 2 : Ah, good evening.is it you? How good of you to come up and see us!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes come on in! 


Speaker 1 : No, I don't think it is he. Come in! Oh, it is you, Mr. Hovstad!
Speaker 2 : Yes, I hope you will forgive me, but I was delayed at the printers. Good evening, Mr. Mayor.
Speaker 1 : Good evening. You have come on business, no doubt.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh please tell me how can I be of help


Speaker 2 : I quite agree with you.
Speaker 1 : Taking one thing with another, there is an excellent spirit of toleration in the town.an admirable municipal spirit. And it all springs from the fact of our having a great common interest to unite us.an interest that is in an equally high degree the concern of every right-minded citizen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes precisely


Speaker 2 : And unemployment is diminishing,
Speaker 1 : Yes, that is another thing. The burden on the poor rates has been lightened, to the great relief of the propertied classes; and that relief will be even greater if only we get a really good summer this year, and lots of visitors.plenty of invalids, who will make the Baths talked about.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I hear this summer will be good for the visitors


Speaker 2 : It looks very promising. Inquiries about apartments and that sort of thing are reaching us, every day.
Speaker 1 : Well, the doctor's article will come in very suitably.
Speaker 2 : Has he been writing something just lately?
Speaker 1 : This is something he wrote in the winter; a recommendation of the Baths.an account of the excellent sanitary conditions here. But I held the article over, temporarily.
Speaker 2 : Ah,.some little difficulty about it, I suppose?
Speaker 1 : No, not at all; I thought it would be better to wait until the spring, because it is just at this time that people begin to think seriously about their summer quarters.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you very much. I was just thinking about the ways to attract people to the Baths


Speaker 2 : Yes, Thomas is really indefatigable when it is a question of the Baths.
Speaker 1 : Well remember, he is the Medical Officer to the Baths.
Speaker 2 : Yes, and what is more, they owe their existence to him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes, that is what Thomas is always saying.


Speaker 1 : How can you think that.?
Speaker 2 : Won't you go in and have something, Mr. Hovstad? My husband is sure to be back directly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that would be great. I will be right there with a morsel.


Speaker 1 : Look here.here is another guest for you, Katherine. Isn't that jolly! Come in, Captain Horster; hang your coat up on this peg. Ah, you don't wear an overcoat. Just think, Katherine; I met him in the street and could hardly persuade him to come up! Come along in, boys. They are ravenously hungry again, you know. Come along, Captain Horster; you must have a slice of beef.
Speaker 2 : But, Thomas, don't you see.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the pleasure is all mine.


Speaker 1 : Yes, sit down and we will have it comfortably.
Speaker 2 : Thanks, I never care about an evening's drinking.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it seemed like one to me. I apologize for the confusion


Speaker 1 : Ah, you must ask the young people that.when the times comes. We shan't be able to see it, of course. That stands to reason.two old fogies, like us.
Speaker 2 : Really, really! I must say that is an extremely odd expression to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Do you really think so?


Speaker 1 : Oh, surely.
Speaker 2 : Indeed I can assure you we have often been very hard put to it, up there. And now to be able to live like a lord! Today, for instance, we had roast beef for dinner.and, what is more, for supper too. Won't you come and have a little bit? Or let me show it you, at any rate? Come here.
Speaker 1 : No, no.not for worlds!
Speaker 2 : Well, but just come here then. Do you see, we have got a table-cover?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s what I am talking about! Living like a lord surely feels nice


Speaker 1 : And we have got a lamp-shade too. Do you see? All out of Katherine's savings! It makes the room so cosy. Don't you think so? Just stand here for a moment.no, no, not there.just here, that's it! Look now, when you get the light on it altogether. I really think it looks very nice, doesn't it?
Speaker 2 : Oh, if you can afford luxuries of this kind.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I can afford it now. Katherine tells me I earn almost as much as we spend.
Speaker 2 : Almost.yes!
Speaker 1 : But a scientific man must live in a little bit of style. I am quite sure an ordinary civil servant spends more in a year than I do.
Speaker 2 : I daresay. A civil servant.a man in a well-paid position...
Speaker 1 : Well, any ordinary merchant, then! A man in that position spends two or three times as much as.
Speaker 2 : It just depends on circumstances.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish that too. Hovstad sounds very interesting.


Speaker 1 : By the way, Hovstad was telling me he was going to print another article of yours.
Speaker 2 : An article of mine?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes that one I hope you all like it as much as I enjoyed writing it.


Speaker 1 : Oh, that one! No, I don't intend that to appear just for the present.
Speaker 2 : Why not? It seems to me that this would be the most opportune moment.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think there is anything abnormal about the present conditions


Speaker 1 : I must say it all sounds most mysterious. Is there something going on that I am to be kept in ignorance of? I should have imagined that I, as Chairman of the governing body of the Baths.
Speaker 2 : And I should have imagined that I.. Oh, come, don't let us fly out at one another, Peter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is absolutely right. 


Speaker 1 : Have I ever at any time tried to go behind your backs?
Speaker 2 : You have an ingrained tendency to take your own way, at all events; and, that is almost equally inadmissible in a well ordered community. The individual ought undoubtedly to acquiesce in subordinating himself to the community.or, to speak more accurately, to the authorities who have the care of the community's welfare.
Speaker 1 : Very likely. But what the deuce has all this got to do with me?
Speaker 2 : That is exactly what you never appear to be willing to learn, my dear Thomas. But, mark my words, some day you will have to suffer for it.sooner or later. Now I have told you. Good-bye.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologize. please calm your temper down. I dint mean to offend you. I only wish you don’t repeat your past mistakes.


Speaker 1 : But, dear Thomas, what have you been doing to him again?
Speaker 2 : Nothing at all. And, anyhow, he can't oblige me to make my report before the proper time.
Speaker 1 : What have you got to make a report to him about?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright I suupose. 


Speaker 2 : I suppose you are going to America?
Speaker 1 : Yes, that is the plan.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no indeed. This coming election will not see my name in it.


Speaker 2 : Sailors are like birds of passage; they feel equally at home in any latitude. And that is only an additional reason for our being all the more keen, Hovstad. Is there to be anything of public interest in tomorrow's "Messenger"?
Speaker 1 : Nothing about municipal affairs. But the day after tomorrow I was thinking of printing your article.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay calm down. I don’t mean to trigger you. I will wait a bit as you suggested.


Speaker 2 : Good evening.
Speaker 1 : Good evening, Petra; come along.
Speaker 2 : And you have all been sitting here enjoying yourselves, while I have been out slaving!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! All this rest will taste even better after all my slaving


Speaker 1 : And you only give to me now!
Speaker 2 : I really had not time to run up again. There it is!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you having fun!


Speaker 1 : Is it the one you have been expecting go anxiously, Thomas?
Speaker 2 : Yes, it is. I must go to my room now and. Where shall I get a light, Katherine? Is there no lamp in my room again?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you katherine!


Speaker 1 : You must be dreadfully wicked, Petra.
Speaker 2 : Wicked?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Pooh, what a duffer, you are, to believe a thing like that!


Speaker 1 : No, indeed I don't.
Speaker 2 : What do you want to be, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish you get what you deserve


Speaker 1 : You must go to your room now, boys; I am sure you have some lessons to learn for tomorrow.
Speaker 2 : I should like so much to stay a little longer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh alright! If you insist


Speaker 1 : But you know, mother, I think you really are wrong about it.
Speaker 2 : Maybe, but I don't like it.not in our own home.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dear, I am not sure you have a good comprehension of it but I would like to hear your thoughst about this.


Speaker 1 : That is perfectly true.
Speaker 2 : If only I had the means, I would start a school of my own; and it would be conducted on very different lines.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to be a bother but starting a school has always been a to-do of mine.


Speaker 1 : A discovery of mine. Just let them come saying, as usual, that it is all fancy and a crazy man's imagination! But they will be careful what they say this time, I can tell you!
Speaker 2 : But, father, tell us what it is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t put yourself down. I am sure it will get better.


Speaker 1 : Quite an unusually healthy spot, in fact.a place that deserves to be recommended in the warmest possible manner either for invalids or for people who are well.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but my dear Thomas.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you have put in a lot of effort. I hope it pays off


Speaker 1 : Yes, that is quite true.
Speaker 2 : At the time, we supposed the visitors had been infected before they came; but later on, in the winter, I began to have a different opinion; and so I set myself to examine the water, as well as I could.
Speaker 1 : Then that is what you have been so busy with?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that was great thinking on your part


Speaker 2 : And what do you propose to do now, Doctor?
Speaker 1 : To see the matter put right, naturally.
Speaker 2 : Can that be done?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : none of us have as much idea as you do. Lets wait for the matter to be put right naturally


Speaker 1 : Then you were right after all.
Speaker 2 : Ah, you remember, Petra.I wrote opposing the plans before the work was begun. But at that time no one would listen to me. Well, I am going to let them have it now. Of course I have prepared a report for the Baths Committee; I have had it ready for a week, and was only waiting for this to come. Now it shall go off at once. Look at that! Four closely written sheets!.and the letter shall go with them. Give me a bit of paper, Katherine.something to wrap them up in. That will do! Now give it to-to-.what the deuce is her name?.give it to the maid, and tell her to take it at once to the Mayor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think he is a reasonable man. He will make a valid decision


Speaker 1 : Will you let me print a short note about your discovery in the "Messenger?"
Speaker 2 : I shall be very much obliged if you will.
Speaker 1 : It is very desirable that the public should be informed of it without delay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that would be great!


Speaker 2 : Are you in, Thomas?
Speaker 1 : Yes, I have just come in. What is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wonder what he has to say!


Speaker 2 : That will be all right; I have got through all my morning visits.
Speaker 1 : I am extremely curious to know how he takes it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant say anything about how or what he thinks.


Speaker 2 : Aren't you a little nervous about that?
Speaker 1 : Oh, he really will be pleased enough, you know. But, at the same time, Peter is so confoundedly afraid of anyone's doing any service to the town except himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am quite willing. If only I can get the thing set right. 


Speaker 2 : Yes; and she declares that.I thought she was only making a fool of me.but it isn't like Petra to do that.
Speaker 1 : Of course not. How could you imagine such a thing!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You can depend upon it that it is true.


Speaker 2 : A bit of luck for the town?
Speaker 1 : Yes, that I made the discovery in good time.
Speaker 2 : Yes, yes. Yes!.But I should never have thought you the sort of man to pull your own brother's leg like this!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a funny request!


Speaker 1 : But you will never get the Mayor to believe a thing like that.
Speaker 2 : We shall see.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but I must give it a try


Speaker 1 : I hope the whole town will be fools enough.
Speaker 2 : The whole town! Well, it wouldn't be a bad thing. It would just serve them right, and teach them a lesson. They think themselves so much cleverer than we old fellows. They hounded me out of the council; they did, I tell you.they hounded me out. Now they shall pay for it. You pull their legs too, Thomas!
Speaker 1 : Really, I.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That is very kind of you.


Speaker 2 : Certainly he is.
Speaker 1 : I might have known it! It must get into the papers. You know how to do it, Thomas! Set your wits to work. Now I must go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I am sorry. I must get going.


Speaker 2 : Yes, that was what we were talking about. Perhaps it is the same thing that brings you here?
Speaker 1 : Yes, it is, Can you spare me a few minutes, Doctor?
Speaker 2 : As long as you like, my dear fellow.
Speaker 1 : Have you heard from the Mayor yet?
Speaker 2 : Not yet. He is coming here later.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. Seems like you have begun to care about the matter


Speaker 1 : Well?
Speaker 2 : From your point of view, as a doctor and a man of science, this affair of the water supply is an isolated matter. I mean, you do not realise that it involves a great many other things.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that is what I think.


Speaker 2 : You said yesterday that the pollution of the water was due to impurities in the soil.
Speaker 2 : Yes, unquestionably it is due to that poisonous morass up at Molledal.
Speaker 1 : Begging your pardon, Doctor, I fancy it is due to quite another morass altogether.
Speaker 2 : What morass?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not quite sure I understand. Do you mind elaborating a little?


Speaker 1 : What the deuce are you driving at, Hovstad?
Speaker 2 : The whole of the town's interests have, little by little, got into the hands of a pack of officials.
Speaker 1 : Oh, come!.they are not all officials.
Speaker 2 : No, but those that are not officials are at any rate the officials' friends and adherents; it is the wealthy folk, the old families in the town, that have got us entirely in their hands.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but after all they are men of ability and knowledge.
Speaker 2 : Did they show any ability or knowledge when they laid the conduit pipes where they are now?
Speaker 1 : No, of course that was a great piece of stupidity on their part. But that is going to be set right now.
Speaker 2 : Do you think that will be all such plain sailing?
Speaker 1 : Plain sailing or no, it has got to be done, anyway.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose your cool. I understand your point and you are right about the officials. Lets think of something together


Speaker 2 : I don't think that will be necessary, my dear fellow, I am certain my brother.
Speaker 1 : Excuse me, doctor; I feel bound to tell you I am inclined to take the matter up.
Speaker 2 : In the paper?
Speaker 1 : Yes. When I took over the "People's Messenger" my idea was to break up this ring of self-opinionated old fossils who had got hold of all the influence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t mind my paper doctor. If this news can help out in any way I wish to do what I can.


Speaker 2 : Yes, at the time we were obliged to climb down a peg or two, it is quite true.because there was a danger of the whole project of the Baths coming to nothing if they failed us. But now the scheme has been carried through, and we can dispense with these grand gentlemen.
Speaker 1 : Dispense with them, yes; but, we owe them a great debt of gratitude.
Speaker 2 : That shall be recognised ungrudgingly, But a journalist of my democratic tendencies cannot let such an opportunity as this slip. The bubble of official infallibility must be pricked. This superstition must be destroyed, like any other.
Speaker 1 : I am whole-heartedly with you in that, Mr. Hovstad; if it is a superstition, away with it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Lets not fear the person or the position. Mayor or brother whats right needs to be pointed out.


Speaker 2 : That goes without saying. Yes, but.but.
Speaker 1 : You must not misjudge me. I am neither more self-interested nor more ambitious than most men.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am of humble origin, as you know


Speaker 2 : I am quite at your service. What is it?
Speaker 1 : Is what I heard from Mr. Billing true, sir.that you mean to improve our water supply?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great news. Your service will be great


Speaker 2 : Because it may be no bad thing to have us small tradesmen at your back. We form, as it were, a compact majority in the town.if we choose. And it is always a good thing to have the majority with you, Doctor.
Speaker 1 : That is undeniably true; but I confess I don't see why such unusual precautions should be necessary in this case. It seems to me that such a plain, straightforward thing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes a demonstration would be great


Speaker 2 : We shall proceed with the greatest moderation, Doctor. Moderation is always my aim; it is the greatest virtue in a citizen.at least, I think so.
Speaker 1 : It is well known to be a characteristic of yours, Mr. Aslaksen.
Speaker 2 : Yes, I think I may pride myself on that. And this matter of the water supply is of the greatest importance to us small tradesmen. The Baths promise to be a regular gold-mine for the town. We shall all make our living out of them, especially those of us who are householders. That is why we will back up the project as strongly as possible. And as I am at present Chairman of the Householders' Association.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. I will do all that I can to be of help


Speaker 1 : And, what is more, local secretary of the Temperance Society.you know, sir, I suppose, that I am a worker in the temperance cause?
Speaker 2 : Of course, of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that.


Speaker 1 : I know that quite well, Mr. Aslaksen.
Speaker 2 : So you see it would be an easy matter for me to set on foot some testimonial, if necessary.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes a testimonial might come in handy


Speaker 1 : Well, what do you say to a glass of beer, then?
Speaker 2 : Nor that either, thank you, Doctor. I never drink anything as early as this. I am going into town now to talk this over with one or two householders, and prepare the ground.
Speaker 1 : It is tremendously kind of you, Mr. Aslaksen; but I really cannot understand the necessity for all these precautions. It seems to me that the thing should go of itself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : We are going to stir them up in the paper tomorrow, Aslaksen


Speaker 2 :  Yes, I am. He is one of those who are floundering in a bog.decent enough fellow though he may be, otherwise. And most of the people here are in just the same case.see-sawing and edging first to one side and then to the other, so overcome with caution and scruple that they never dare to take any decided step.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but Aslaksen seemed to me so thoroughly well-intentioned
Speaker 2 : There is one thing I esteem higher than that; and that is for a man to be self-reliant and sure of himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That is why I want to seize this opportunity


Speaker 1 : Do you think it will?
Speaker 2 : Not for a moment. But at all events it makes me feel proud to know that I have the liberal-minded independent press on my side. Yes, and just imagine.I have had a visit from the Chairman of the Householders' Association!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose your cool over it. They wished to offer me his support.


Speaker 1 : To offer me his support too. They will support me in a body if it should be necessary. Katherine.do you know what I have got behind me?
Speaker 2 : Behind you? No, what have you got behind you?
Speaker 1 : The compact majority.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I guess so.


Speaker 2 : Yes, because until I was absolutely certain about it.
Speaker 1 : Then you mean that you are absolutely certain now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : now I mist certainly am convinced


Speaker 2 : Is it your intention to bring this document before the Baths Committee as a sort of official communication?
Speaker 1 : Certainly. Something must be done in the matter.and that quickly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I dint wish to use that terminology. I am not sure why but I have offended anybody, I deeply apologize


Speaker 2 : Well, can you describe it any other way, Peter? Just think.water that is poisonous, whether you drink it or bathe in it! And this we offer to the poor sick folk who come to us trustfully and pay us at an exorbitant rate to be made well again!
Speaker 1 : And your reasoning leads you to this conclusion, that we must build a sewer to draw off the alleged impurities from Molledal and must relay the water conduits.
Speaker 2 : Yes. Do you see any other way out of it? I don't.
Speaker 1 : I made a pretext this morning to go and see the town engineer, and, as if only half seriously, broached the subject of these proposals as a thing we might perhaps have to take under consideration some time later on.
Speaker 2 : Some time later on!
Speaker 1 : He smiled at what he considered to be my extravagance, naturally. Have you taken the trouble to consider what your proposed alterations would cost? According to the information I obtained, the expenses would probably mount up to fifteen or twenty thousand pounds.
Speaker 2 : Would it cost so much?
Speaker 1 : Yes; and the worst part of it would be that the work would take at least two years.
Speaker 2 : Two years? Two whole years?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your composure in this situation. We need to keeps our heads calm and think about this.


Speaker 1 : Yes but, Peter, that is what it is.
Speaker 2 : And all this at this juncture.just as the Baths are beginning to be known. There are other towns in the neighbourhood with qualifications to attract visitors for bathing purposes. Don't you suppose they would immediately strain every nerve to divert the entire stream of strangers to themselves? Unquestionably they would; and then where should we be? We should probably have to abandon the whole thing, which has cost us so much money-and then you would have ruined your native town.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its not your fault. Nobody blames you so stop looking so down.


Speaker 1 : It is simply and solely through the Baths that the town has before it any future worth mentioning. You know that just as well as I.
Speaker 2 : But what do you think ought to be done, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? There is a chance to save the baths then?


Speaker 1 : I tell you it is even worse!.or at all events it will be in summer, when the warm weather comes.
Speaker 2 : As I said, I believe you exaggerate the matter considerably. A capable physician ought to know what measures to take.he ought to be capable of preventing injurious influences or of remedying them if they become obviously persistent.
Speaker 1 : Well? What more?
Speaker 2 : The water supply for the Baths is now an established fact, and in consequence must be treated as such. But probably the Committee, at its discretion, will not be disinclined to consider the question of how far it might be possible to introduce certain improvements consistently with a reasonable expenditure.
Speaker 1 : And do you suppose that I will have anything to do with such a piece of trickery as that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. I understand your point and you are right it maybe trickery but let us think about it first.


Speaker 2 : Yes, it would be a trick.a fraud, a lie, a downright crime towards the public, towards the whole community!
Speaker 1 : I have not, as I remarked before, been able to convince myself that there is actually any imminent danger.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I believe you do. I was merely trying to help.


Speaker 2 : And even if that were true? If I perhaps guard my reputation somewhat anxiously, it is in the interests of the town. Without moral authority I am powerless to direct public affairs as seems, to my judgment, to be best for the common good. And on that account.and for various other reasons too.it appears to me to be a matter of importance that your report should not be delivered to the Committee. In the interests of the public, you must withhold it. Then, later on, I will raise the question and we will do our best, privately; but nothing of this unfortunate affair not a single word of it.must come to the ears of the public.
Speaker 1 : I am afraid you will not be able to prevent that now, my dear Peter.
Speaker 2 : It must and shall be prevented.
Speaker 2 : For you and yours, yes.
Speaker 1 : What the deuce do you mean?
Speaker 2 : I believe I have always behaved in a brotherly way to you.haven't I always been ready to oblige or to help you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : then how can I help you today?


Speaker 1 : There is no need. Indeed, to some extent I was forced to do so.for my own sake. I always hoped that, if I helped to improve your financial position, I should be able to keep some check on you.
Speaker 2 : What! Then it was only for your own sake.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant begin to understand how that must feel for you but I hope someday this pain fades away.


Speaker 1 : And do you consider that I do that?
Speaker 2 : Yes, unfortunately, you do, without even being aware of it. You have a restless, pugnacious, rebellious disposition. And then there is that disastrous propensity of yours to want to write about every sort of possible and impossible thing. The moment an idea comes into your head, you must needs go and write a newspaper article or a whole pamphlet about it.
Speaker 1 : Well, but is it not the duty of a citizen to let the public share in any new ideas he may have?
Speaker 2 : Oh, the public doesn't require any new ideas. The public is best served by the good, old established ideas it already has.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : If I am being frank, Yes that is my honest opinion


Speaker 1 : Yes, and for once I must talk frankly to you. Hitherto I have tried to avoid doing so, because I know how irritable you are; but now I must tell you the truth, Thomas. You have no conception what an amount of harm you do yourself by your impetuosity. You complain of the authorities, you even complain of the government.you are always pulling them to pieces; you insist that you have been neglected and persecuted. But what else can such a cantankerous man as you expect?
Speaker 2 : What next! Cantankerous, am I?
Speaker 1 : Yes, Thomas, you are an extremely cantankerous man to work with.I know that to my cost. You disregard everything that you ought to have consideration for. You seem completely to forget that it is me you have to thank for your appointment here as medical officer to the Baths.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your hard work in writing really was a single handed fight. I sppreciate it.


Speaker 2 : Undoubtedly. But things were not ripe for the scheme then.though, of course, you could not judge of that in your out-of-the-way corner up north. But as soon as the opportune moment came I.and the others.took the matter into our hands.
Speaker 1 : Yes, and made this mess of all my beautiful plan. It is pretty obvious now what clever fellows you were!
Speaker 2 : To my mind the whole thing only seems to mean that you are seeking another outlet for your combativeness. You want to pick a quarrel with your superiors.an old habit of yours. You cannot put up with any authority over you. You look askance at anyone who occupies a superior official position; you regard him as a personal enemy, and then any stick is good enough to beat him with. But now I have called your attention to the fact that the town's interests are at stake.and, incidentally, my own too. And therefore, I must tell you, Thomas, that you will find me inexorable with regard to what I am about to require you to do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please done be upset. I have only been directed you to give you the order


Speaker 1 : As you have been so indiscreet as to speak of this delicate matter to outsiders, despite the fact that you ought to have treated it as entirely official and confidential, it is obviously impossible to hush it up now. All sorts of rumours will get about directly, and everybody who has a grudge against us will take care to embellish these rumours. So it will be necessary for you to refute them publicly.
Speaker 2 : I! How? I don't understand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand I might have not handled the delicate matter indiscreetly but please try and see my point. This matter need to be out in the open for people to see.


Speaker 1 : Oho!.so that is what you expect!
Speaker 2 : And, what is more, we shall expect you to make public profession of your confidence in the Committee and in their readiness to consider fully and conscientiously what steps may be necessary to remedy any possible defects.
Speaker 1 : But you will never be able to do that by patching and tinkering at it.never! Take my word for it, Peter; I mean what I say, as deliberately and emphatically as possible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I might not agree with this but I understand my duty.


Speaker 2 : This is too much! I, a doctor, a man of science, have no right to.!
Speaker 1 : The matter in hand is not simply a scientific one. It is a complicated matter, and has its economic as well as its technical side.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. I undrestand your point doctor but please try and see that it’s a delicate topic.


Speaker 2 : You forbid.! You! A pack of.
Speaker 1 : I forbid it.I, your chief; and if I forbid it, you have to obey.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : brother, I am bound by my duty to do as such. Please understand it!


Speaker 2 : And so I am to give myself the lie, publicly?
Speaker 1 : We consider it absolutely necessary that you should make some such public statement as I have asked for.
Speaker 2 : And if I do not.obey?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : very well, if it helps reassure the public, please do as you wish


Speaker 1 : Very well; but in that case I shall use my pen against you. I stick to what I have said; I will show that I am right and that you are wrong. And what will you do then?
Speaker 2 : Then I shall not be able to prevent your being dismissed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please understand that dismissal is what happens when someone goes against the rules. I hope you understand.


Speaker 1 : Dismissed from the staff of the Baths. I shall be obliged to propose that you shall immediately be given notice, and shall not be allowed any further participation in the Baths' affairs.
Speaker 2 : You would dare to do that!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish none of us had to do this.


Speaker 1 : .for his own family, as I was saying, as well as for the town he lives in.
Speaker 2 : It is I who have the real good of the town at heart! I want to lay bare the defects that sooner or later must come to the light of day. I will show whether I love my native town.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t wish to do that but I just hope nothing else is at risk here


Speaker 1 : But, dear Thomas, your brother has power on his side.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but I have right on mine, I tell you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish my right could overpower his might!s


Speaker 1 : But, good heavens, Thomas, you don't mean to?
Speaker 2 : Don't mean to what?
Speaker 1 : To set yourself up in opposition to your brother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right you should stand by whats right.


Speaker 2 : Oho, Katherine! Just give me time, and you will see how I will carry the war into their camp.
Speaker 1 : Yes, you carry the war into their camp, and you get your dismissal.that is what you will do.
Speaker 2 : In any case I shall have done my duty towards the public.towards the community, I, who am called its enemy!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure I will set a good example for my family by fighting for whats right.


Speaker 1 : Don't you think the Doctor hits them pretty hard?
Speaker 2 : Hard? Bless my soul, he's crushing! Every word falls like.how shall I put it?.like the blow of a sledgehammer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point. I just wish these atrocities come to an end.


Speaker 1 : Yes, and if the Mayor doesn't like it.
Speaker 2 : That will be the devil of a nuisance.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes they might need it


Speaker 1 : Yes, because they will certainly have to fork out a pretty penny.
Speaker 2 : Yes, you may be sure they will. And in this way the ring will be broken up, you see, and then in every issue of the paper we will enlighten the public on the Mayor's incapability on one point and another, and make it clear that all the positions of trust in the town, the whole control of municipal affairs, ought to be put in the hands of the Liberals.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my! I cant contain my excitement


Speaker 1 : Burst upon them.yes, like a flash of lightning!
Speaker 2 : .and to have it submitted to the judgment of my intelligent fellow townsmen. You cannot imagine what I have gone through today. I have been threatened first with one thing and then with another; they have tried to rob me of my most elementary rights as a man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right.


Speaker 1 : Not a bit of it, not a bit of it! Don't spare the dynamite!
Speaker 2 : Because it is not merely a question of water-supply and drains now, you know. No.it is the whole of our social life that we have got to purify and disinfect.
Speaker 1 : Spoken like a deliverer!
Speaker 2 : All the incapables must be turned out, you understand.and that in every walk of life! Endless vistas have opened themselves to my mind's eye today. I cannot see it all quite clearly yet, but I shall in time. Young and vigorous standard-bearers.those are what we need and must seek, my friends; we must have new men in command at all our outposts.
Speaker 1 : Hear hear!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Standing by one another is exactly what will show our unity


Speaker 2 : Yes, there is no denying that the Doctor is a true friend to the town.a real friend to the community, that he is.
Speaker 1 : Take my word for it, Aslaksen, Dr Stockmann is a friend of the people.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you, thank you, my dear friends.


Speaker 2 : You are so infernally timid, Aslaksen!
Speaker 1 : Timid? Yes, when it is a question of the local authorities, I am timid, Mr. Billing; it is a lesson I have learned in the school of experience, let me tell you. But try me in higher politics, in matters that concern the government itself, and then see if I am timid.
Speaker 2 : No, you aren't, I admit. But this is simply contradicting yourself.
Speaker 2 : But what of the education of citizens by self government.don't you attach any importance to that?
Speaker 1 : When a man has interests of his own to protect, he cannot think of everything, Mr. Hovstad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get mad. I would love to be of help but I am bounf=d too.


Speaker 2 : Yes, if we only had that, then.
Speaker 1 : Suppose you were to apply to Dr Stockmann?
Speaker 2 : What is the use? He has got nothing.
Speaker 1 : No, but he has got a warm man in the background, old Morten Kiil."the Badger," as they call him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course he has! 


Speaker 2 : Have you come with a message from your father, by any chance?
Speaker 1 : No, I have come on my own account. Here is the English story.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool. Listen to me carefully.


Speaker 2 : Because I am not going to translate it.
Speaker 1 : But you promised me faithfully.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I havent. I hope it doesn’t make the situation any worse.


Speaker 2 : No, you know quite well I don't understand English; but.
Speaker 1 : Quite so. That is why I wanted to tell you that you must find something else. You can't use this for the "People's Messenger."
Speaker 2 : Why not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Lets keep our composure and think of a better solution


Speaker 1 : Oh, for that matter.
Speaker 2 : You don't understand me. The burden of this story is that there is a supernatural power that looks after the so-called good people in this world and makes everything happen for the best in their case.while all the so-called bad people are punished.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Then I don’t think that should be a problem. Lets just clamly move ahead.


Speaker 1 : We journalists are not much worth, Miss Stockmann.
Speaker 2 : Do you really mean that?
Speaker 1 : I think so sometimes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that must be right if you are so confident


Speaker 2 : This matter of your father's, you mean?
Speaker 1 : Exactly. It seems to me that now you must feel you are a man worth more than most.
Speaker 2 : Yes, today I do feel something of that sort.
Speaker 1 : Of course you do, don't you? It is a splendid vocation you have chosen.to smooth the way for the march of unappreciated truths, and new and courageous lines of thought. If it were nothing more than because you stand fearlessly in the open and take up the cause of an injured man.
Speaker 2 : Especially when that injured man is.ahem!.I don't rightly know how to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Especially when he is your father I meant.


Speaker 1 : Yes, Petra.Miss Petra.
Speaker 2 : Is it that, that is first and foremost with you? Not the matter itself? Not the truth?.not my father's big generous heart?
Speaker 1 : Certainly.of course.that too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh come on! I was just playing around. I will not repeat it again.


Speaker 2 : Can you really take it so amiss in me that it is mostly for your sake.?
Speaker 1 : What I am angry with you for, is for not having been honest with my father. You talked to him as if the truth and the good of the community were what lay nearest to your heart. You have made fools of both my father and me. You are not the man you made yourself out to be. And that I shall never forgive you-never!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to be bitter. I apologize but may I ask why of all now?


Speaker 2 : I know what to believe. Goodbye.
Speaker 1 : Damnation, Hovstad!. Oh, this is awkward.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to calm down. I will give it to whomever you wish to give it to.


Speaker 2 : I say.Mr. Hovstad.
Speaker 1 : Well well!.what is it?
Speaker 2 : The Mayor is outside in the printing room.
Speaker 1 : The Mayor, did you say?
Speaker 2 : Yes he wants to speak to you. He came in by the back door.didn't want to be seen, you understand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes don’t worry we will make sure no body gets in


Speaker 1 : The Medical Officer of the Baths is responsible for what happened today.
Speaker 2 : Indeed? The Doctor?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really? That’s good that the report has been addressed


Speaker 1 : Has he indeed?
Speaker 2 : Yes.has he not told you? I thought he said.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : do you mind giving me a copy if you have it?


Speaker 1 : Oh, is THAT what you were speaking about?
Speaker 2 : Yes, that is it. What do you think of it?
Speaker 1 : Oh, I am only a layman.and I have only taken a very cursory glance at it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cannot very well refuse a distinguished man


Speaker 2 : I have nothing to do with editing the paper, Mr. Mayor.
Speaker 1 : I understand.
Speaker 2 : I merely print what is put into my hands.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure what I said to upset you but lets try to clear it up shall we?


Speaker 1 : I am delighted to hear you think so, sir.
Speaker 2 : And a man of very considerable influence.
Speaker 1 : Chiefly among the small tradesmen, sir.
Speaker 2 : The small tax-payers are the majority.here as everywhere else.
Speaker 1 : That is true.
Speaker 2 : And I have no doubt you know the general trend of opinion among them, don't you?
Speaker 1 : Yes I think I may say I do, Mr. Mayor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good! I only intend the town's happiness.


Speaker 2 : At a provisional estimate, the alterations that the Medical Officer asserts to be desirable will cost somewhere about twenty thousand pounds.
Speaker 1 : That is a lot of money, but.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so scared about a loan. I am sure I wont be a problem


Speaker 2 : Well, my dear Mr. Aslaksen, where else is the money to come from?
Speaker 1 : The gentlemen who own the Baths ought to provide that.
Speaker 2 : The proprietors of the Baths are not in a position to incur any further expense.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes as far as I know. If the town wants these very extensive alterations, it will have to pay for them.


Speaker 1 : For two years?
Speaker 2 : Yes, the work will take as long as that.at least.
Speaker 1 : I'm damned if we will stand that, Mr. Mayor! What are we householders to live upon in the meantime?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t understand. Lets not look so down. I am sure we all will find a solution to this.


Speaker 2 : And the whole thing is merely imagination?
Speaker 1 : With the best will in the world, I have not been able to come to any other conclusion.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I sgree with you. Lets find a solution to it.


Speaker 2 : Here I am again.
Speaker 1 : Already, Doctor? Hurry up with what we were speaking about, Aslaksen. We are very pressed for time today.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think so.


Speaker 2 : All right, my dear friends; I will come back. I do not mind coming back twice if necessary. A matter of such great importance.the welfare of the town at stake.it is no time to shirk trouble, Look here.there is one thing more I want to speak to you about.
Speaker 1 : Excuse me, but could it not wait till some other time?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right sir. Your contribution to this town's welfare has been massive


Speaker 2 : Of what sort?
Speaker 1 : Well, whatever it is.whether it is a demonstration in my honour, or a banquet, or a subscription list for some presentation to me.whatever it is, you most promise me solemnly and faithfully to put a stop to it. You too, Mr. Aslaksen; do you understand?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would appreciate the truth.


Speaker 2 : Nonsense!.we know all about that.
Speaker 1 : Well, one would not give you credit for much thought for your wife and children today; if you had had that, you would not have gone and dragged us all into misfortune.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be upset. I am merely trying to point out some things but I understand this is not the time for it.


Speaker 2 : Here we have the topmost pinnacle of authority!
Speaker 1 : The Mayor's hat!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the mayor's hat is here and that’s all that’s important


Speaker 2 : A false light! Leave that part of it to me. Only print my article; I am quite capable of defending it.
Speaker 1 : I am not going to print it. I cannot and will not and dare not print it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to dissapoint you doctor, but I have my reasons. I hope you understand me


Speaker 2 : No, it is the subscribers, Doctor.
Speaker 1 : Fortunately, yes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s right


Speaker 2 : Indeed.
Speaker 1 : My hat and stick, if you please. Your authority as mayor has come to an untimely end.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its looks quite impossible


Speaker 2 : Don't give in, Thomas. I will tell the boys to go with you.
Speaker 1 : That is a splendid idea!
Speaker 2 : Morten will be delighted; and Ejlif will do whatever he does.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure they will all help. But beofre that lets calm down and make some informed decisions.


Speaker 1 : Brought your whistle too, I expect!
Speaker 2 : I should think so. Haven't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay then that’s good. Lets direct our angers in the right direction


Speaker 1 : Oh, I know how to control myself.
Speaker 2 : I think we ought to elect a chairman first.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I feel like it is necessary. We need somebody to lead us


Speaker 1 : Mr. Chairman.
Speaker 2 : The Mayor will address the meeting.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure what to say right now


Speaker 1 : I, too, feel called upon to explain my position. Dr Stockmann's agitation appeared to be gaining a certain amount of sympathy at first, so I supported it as impartially as I could. But presently we had reason to suspect that we had allowed ourselves to be misled by misrepresentation of the state of affairs.
Speaker 2 : Misrepresentation.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I entirely agree with the speaker.


Speaker 1 : Am I allowed to speak?
Speaker 2 : Dr Stockmann will address the meeting.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh please go ahead and give me this important news


Speaker 1 : .but I got them clear in my mind at last, and then I saw the whole situation lucidly. And that is why I am standing here to-night. I have a great revelation to make to you, my fellow-citizens! I will impart to you a discovery of a far wider scope than the trifling matter that our water supply is poisoned and our medicinal Baths are standing on pestiferous soil.
Speaker 2 : Don't talk about the Baths! We won't hear you! None of that!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! Please go on


Speaker 1 : Wait a bit! I do not think anyone will charge me with having forgotten my native town up there. I was like one of the eider-ducks brooding on its nest, and what I hatched was the plans for these Baths. And then when fate at last decreed for me the great happiness of coming home again.I assure you, gentlemen, I thought I had nothing more in the world to wish for. Or rather, there was one thing I wished for.eagerly, untiringly, ardently.and that was to be able to be of service to my native town and the good of the community.
Speaker 2 : You chose a strange way of doing it.ahem!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so?


Speaker 1 : The majority never has right on its side. Never, I say! That is one of these social lies against which an independent, intelligent man must wage war. Who is it that constitute the majority of the population in a country? Is it the clever folk, or the stupid? I don't imagine you will dispute the fact that at present the stupid people are in an absolutely overwhelming majority all the world over. But, good Lord!.you can never pretend that it is right that the stupid folk should govern the clever ones! Oh, yes.you can shout me down, I know! But you cannot answer me. The majority has might on its side.unfortunately; but right it has not. I am in the right.I and a few other scattered individuals. The minority is always in the right.
Speaker 2 : Aha!.so Dr Stockmann has become an aristocrat since the day before yesterday!
Speaker 1 : I have already said that I don't intend to waste a word on the puny, narrow-chested, short-winded crew whom we are leaving astern. Pulsating life no longer concerns itself with them. I am thinking of the few, the scattered few amongst us, who have absorbed new and vigorous truths. Such men stand, as it were, at the outposts, so far ahead that the compact majority has not yet been able to come up with them; and there they are fighting for truths that are too newly-born into the world of consciousness to have any considerable number of people on their side as yet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to insinuate anythingo f such sort. I am merely trying to state some facts


Speaker 2 : Have you gone clean out of your senses, Peter? I am sticking as closely to my subject as I can; for my subject is precisely this, that it is the masses, the majority.this infernal compact majority.that poisons the sources of our moral life and infects the ground we stand on.
Speaker 1 : And all this because the great, broadminded majority of the people is prudent enough to show deference only to well-ascertained and well-approved truths?
Speaker 2 : Ah, my good Mr. Hovstad, don't talk nonsense about well-ascertained truths! The truths of which the masses now approve are the very truths that the fighters at the outposts held to in the days of our grandfathers. We fighters at the outposts nowadays no longer approve of them; and I do not believe there is any other well-ascertained truth except this, that no community can live a healthy life if it is nourished only on such old marrowless truths.
Speaker 1 : But, instead of standing there using vague generalities, it would be interesting if you would tell us what these old marrowless truths are, that we are nourished on.
Speaker 2 : Oh, I could give you a whole string of such abominations; but to begin with I will confine myself to one well-approved truth, which at bottom is a foul lie, but upon which nevertheless Mr. Hovstad and the "People's Messenger" and all the "Messenger's" supporters are nourished.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would love to proceed but looks like we might be getting heated up.


Speaker 1 : Yes but, bless my soul, we are, my friend! It is true we are the finest animals anyone could wish for; but, even among us, exceptionally fine animals are rare. There is a tremendous difference between poodle-men and cur-men. And the amusing part of it is, that Mr. Hovstad quite agrees with me as long as it is a question of four-footed animals.
Speaker 2 : Yes, it is true enough as far as they are concerned.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right!


Speaker 1 : I protest against personal allusions of this kind.
Speaker 2 : .and that, not because he is like myself, descended from some old rascal of a pirate from Pomerania or thereabouts.because that is who we are descended from.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I will keep in mind that your thoughts toward this topic contradict mine


Speaker 1 : We cannot hear you now, Doctor. A formal vote is about to be taken; but, out of regard for personal feelings, it shall be by ballot and not verbal. Have you any clean paper, Mr. Billing?
Speaker 2 : I have both blue and white here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! That’s a great idea!


Speaker 1 : I shouldn't wonder if there were.
Speaker 2 : No, it is nothing more than sheer malice; he wants to get even with somebody for something or other.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it works out for him


Speaker 1 : I have done my duty.
Speaker 2 : What was that you said about the tanneries at Molledal?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reall? Wow that’s shocking


Speaker 1 : My tannery too?
Speaker 2 : Unfortunately your tannery is by far the worst.
Speaker 1 : Are you going to put that in the papers?
Speaker 2 : I shall conceal nothing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset you but I need to state the facts


Speaker 1 : Then you can have no objection to my doing the same with mine.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I look forward to it


Speaker 1 : You will see he won't dare to come.
Speaker 2 : Well, that is just what Randine thought.that he didn't dare to, on account of the neighbours. What is it you want, Randine? Give it to me. Here is a letter for you, Thomas.
Speaker 1 : Let me see it. Ah!.of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get so upset. I am sure it is someone important


Speaker 2 : Yes, yes, I see well enough; the whole lot of them in the town are cowards; not a man among them dares do anything for fear of the others. But it doesn't matter to us, Katherine. We are going to sail away to the New World, and.
Speaker 1 : But, Thomas, are you sure we are well advised to take this step?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh thomas, they are the best ones you have. Please don’t be sad about that


Speaker 2 : Oh, dear!.and they are the best pair you have got!
Speaker 1 : You should never wear your best trousers when you go out to fight for freedom and truth. It is not that I care so much about the trousers, you know; you can always sew them up again for me. But that the common herd should dare to make this attack on me, as if they were my equals.that is what I cannot, for the life of me, swallow!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I suppose you are right. I never thought of it that way.


Speaker 2 : You too?
Speaker 1 : Mrs Busk gave me my notice; so I thought it was best to go at once.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 2 : It was not only that. Just listen to this, father!
Speaker 1 : Well?
Speaker 2 : Mrs Busk showed me no less than three letters she received this morning.
Speaker 1 : Anonymous, I suppose?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t understand. Lets not loose our cool. We need to sit calmly and think about it.


Speaker 2 : Yes, because they didn't dare to risk signing their names, Katherine!
Speaker 1 : And two of them were to the effect that a man, who has been our guest here, was declaring last night at the Club that my views on various subjects are extremely emancipated.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no absolutely not


Speaker 2 : And someone who had been a guest of ours! That shows you the return you get for your hospitality, Thomas!
Speaker 1 : We won't live in such a disgusting hole any longer. Pack up as quickly as you can, Katherine; the sooner we can get away, the better.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay sure.


Speaker 2 : Yes, isn't their swinish cowardice astonishing? Look here, I will show you something! There are all the stones they have thrown through my windows. Just look at them! I'm hanged if there are more than two decently large bits of hard stone in the whole heap; the rest are nothing but gravel.wretched little things. And yet they stood out there bawling and swearing that they would do me some violence; but as for doing anything.you don't see much of that in this town.
Speaker 1 : Just as well for you this time, doctor!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. We need to understand each other's opinion and calmly move ahead


Speaker 2 : Hm!.that was just what I had come to speak about.
Speaker 1 : Why, has anything gone wrong with the ship?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 2 : You mustn't take it to heart; I shall be sure to find a job with some ship-owner or other, elsewhere.
Speaker 1 : And that is this man Vik.a wealthy man, independent of everyone and everything.! Shame on him!
Speaker 2 : He is quite an excellent fellow otherwise; he told me himself he would willingly have kept me on, if only he had dared.
Speaker 1 : But he didn't dare? No, of course not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he might be right. Lets see what happens


Speaker 2 : Oh, you are engaged. In that case, I will.
Speaker 1 : No, no, come in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry. We will go into the sitting-room


Speaker 2 : No, go in there with them, Captain Horster; I want to hear more about..
Speaker 1 : Very well, I will wait, then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you, if I may.


Speaker 2 : Thank you, if I may. I think I caught cold last night; I stood and shivered.
Speaker 1 : Really? I found it warm enough.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so regretful. I am sure it will work out in the end.


Speaker 2 : Yes, dating from today. It gives us pain to do it; but, to speak frankly, we dared not do otherwise on account of public opinion.
Speaker 1 : Dared not? I seem to have heard that word before, today.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was funny! I am glad to see you find positivity at such times


Speaker 2 : Devil take the practice! But why are you so sure of that?
Speaker 1 : The Householders' Association is circulating a list from house to house. All right-minded citizens are being called upon to give up employing you; and I can assure you that not a single head of a family will risk refusing his signature. They simply dare not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh it is just a phase. I hope it works out for all


Speaker 2 : If I might advise you, it would be best to leave the place for a little while.
Speaker 1 : Yes, the propriety of leaving the place has occurred to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : acknowledging is the main thing


Speaker 2 : I might have my appointment restored to me, do you mean?
Speaker 1 : Perhaps. It is not at all impossible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not escalate this situation. Lets calm down and think this through


Speaker 2 : Public opinion is an extremely mutable thing. And, to be quite candid with you, it is a matter of great importance to us to have some admission of that sort from you in writing.
Speaker 1 : Oh, that's what you are after, is it! I will just trouble you to remember what I said to you lately about foxy tricks of that sort!
Speaker 2 : Your position was quite different then. At that time you had reason to suppose you had the whole town at your back.
Speaker 1 : Yes, and now I feel I have the whole town ON my back.. I would not do it if I had the devil and his dam on my back.! Never.never, I tell you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I never considered my family and always acted as such. I understand your point.


Speaker 2 : I have no right! There is only one single thing in the world a free man has no right to do. Do you know what that is?
Speaker 1 : No.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not escalate this situation. Lets calm down and think this through


Speaker 2 : This sort of thing sounds extremely plausible, of course; and if there were no other explanation for your obstinacy.. But as it happens that there is.
Speaker 1 : What do you mean?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand what you mean


Speaker 2 : What in the world is all this about?
Speaker 1 : Do you really ask me to believe that you are ignorant of the terms of Mr. Kiil's will?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t look so down about it.


Speaker 2 : In the first place, it is by no means a small amount that is in question. Mr. Kiil is a fairly wealthy man.
Speaker 1 : I had no notion of that!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I suppose not. I hope its goes for a good cause though


Speaker 2 : Never, on my honour! Quite the reverse; he has consistently done nothing but fume at being so unconscionably heavily taxed. But are you perfectly certain of this, Peter?
Speaker 1 : I have it from an absolutely reliable source.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you must. Stop panicing and give her the good news


Speaker 2 : Oh, nothing, nothing; you can go back. Provided for!.Just think of it, we are all provided for! And for life! What a blessed feeling it is to know one is provided for!
Speaker 1 : Yes, but that is just exactly what you are not. Mr. Kiil can alter his will any day he likes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you sound so positive in such a situation


Speaker 2 : I won't sit. You look very comfortable here today, Thomas.
Speaker 1 : Yes, don't we!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thanks for asking!


Speaker 2 : It is.
Speaker 1 : So I should think. Do you know what I have got here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! That was funny. Come on


Speaker 2 : And you have been buying.?
Speaker 1 : As many as I could pay for.
Speaker 2 : But, my dear Mr. Kiil.consider the state of the Baths' affairs!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Oh that’s great news


Speaker 1 : Well, you can see for yourself that I have done all I can, but.. They are all mad in this town!
Speaker 2 : You said yesterday that the worst of this pollution came from my tannery. If that is true, then my grandfather and my father before me, and I myself, for many years past, have been poisoning the town like three destroying angels. Do you think I am going to sit quiet under that reproach?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! You must have a solid proposal then!


Speaker 1 : No, thank you. I am jealous of my name and reputation. They call me "the Badger," I am told. A badger is a kind of pig, I believe; but I am not going to give them the right to call me that. I mean to live and die a clean man.
Speaker 2 : And how are you going to set about it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? I would be happy to do so


Speaker 1 : And you have gone and taken Katherine's money for this!
Speaker 2 : Yes, the whole of the money is invested in the Baths now. And now I just want to see whether you are quite stark, staring mad, Thomas! If you still make out that these animals and other nasty things of that sort come from my tannery, it will be exactly as if you were to flay broad strips of skin from Katherine's body, and Petra's, and the boys'; and no decent man would do that.unless he were mad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh please! Stop being so infuriated. I never meant to hurt you but if I have then I am deeply sorry.


Speaker 1 : You cannot be so absurdly mad as all that, when it is a question of your wife and children.
Speaker 2 : Why couldn't you consult me about it, before you went and bought all that trash?
Speaker 1 : What is done cannot be undone.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as long as you are happy about it.


Speaker 2 : To kill these animals, do you mean?
Speaker 1 : Yes, or to make them innocuous.
Speaker 2 : Couldn't you try some rat's-bane?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t raise your temper. Lets calm ourselves down and have a decent conversation, shall we?


Speaker 1 : I can quite understand that you are annoyed with us for our attitude at the meeting yesterday.
Speaker 2 : Attitude, do you call it? Yes, it was a charming attitude! I call it weak, womanish.damnably shameful!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome!


Speaker 1 : Your reasons for wishing to get the control of the Baths are mainly scientific, I take it.
Speaker 2 : Of course; it was for scientific reasons that I persuaded the old "Badger" to stand in with me in the matter. So we will tinker at the conduit-pipes a little, and dig up a little bit of the shore, and it shan't cost the town a sixpence. That will be all right.eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are absolutely right!


Speaker 1 : The Press is a power in a free community. Doctor.
Speaker 2 : Quite so. And so is public opinion. And you, Mr. Aslaksen.I suppose you will be answerable for the Householders' Association?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are absolutely right!


Speaker 1 : We should prefer to help you without any return whatever, believe me. But the "People's Messenger" is in rather a shaky condition; it doesn't go really well; and I should be very unwilling to suspend the paper now, when there is so much work to do here in the political way.
Speaker 2 : Quite so; that would be a great trial to such a friend of the people as you are. But I am an enemy of the people, remember! Where have I put my stick? Where the devil is my stick?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to startle you. It might not be a big deal


Speaker 1 : I will tell you later on; I have something else to think about now. Look there, Katherine; what is written there?
Speaker 2 : Three big Noes; what does that mean.
Speaker 1 : I will tell you that too, later on. There, Petra; tell sooty-face to run over to the "Badger's" with that, as quick as she can. Hurry up!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t raise your temper. Lets calm ourselves down and have a decent conversation, shall we?


Speaker 2 : She has gone with it.
Speaker 1 : Good..Going away, did you say? No, I'll be hanged if we are going away! We are going to stay where we are, Katherine!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes katherine. Stay here, we don’t have to leave


Speaker 2 : Yes, father, I know lots!
Speaker 1 : That's capital! Bring me some specimens of them. I am going to experiment with curs, just for once; there may be some exceptional heads among them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Then you shall drive all the wolves out of the country, my boys!


Speaker 2 : Do you know, I'm getting so I'm actually afraid to leave them alone with that governess. She's too romantic. I'll wager she's got a whole book full of ghost stories, superstitions, and yellow-journal horrors up her sleeve.
Speaker 1 : Oh, pooh! Don't go milling around for trouble. When I was a kid I used to get fun out of my horrors.
Speaker 2 : But I imagine you were more courageous than most of us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to provoke you. I am sorry. I had seen your reactions to those stories so I ended up calling you courageous


Speaker 1 : Well, Nevada.the Far West at that time.I should think a child would have grown so accustomed to violent scenes.
Speaker 2 : Oh, in the mining camps; but you don't suppose my father lugged me along on his prospecting trips, do you? Why, I never saw any rough scenes until I'd finished with school and went to live with father in Goldfield.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes and those trips were intense. Don’t loose you cool over it. My father made sure I was well and safe


Speaker 1 : Yes.but I didn't mean he was a rough scene. He was very mild even in those days. Do tell me what he was like at Cornell.
Speaker 2 : A romanticist.and he still is!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no no! I dint mean to trigger you. I apologize. I called him a romanticist based off on what I saw


Speaker 1 : Don't mind him, Martha. He always was crazy.
Speaker 2 : Why did you elect to take up mining engineering at Cornell instead of a classical degree at the Yale of your fathers and brothers? Because you had been reading Bret Harte in prep. school and mistaken him for a modern realist. You devoted four years to grooming yourself for another outcast of Poker Flat.
Speaker 1 : It was you who were hypnotized by Harte.so much so that his West of the past is still your blinded New England-movie idea of the West at present. But go on. What next?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t sound so dejected. I am sure you will have a lot of fun, Martha


Speaker 2 : The man is mad, Martha.
Speaker 1 : Mad! What an accusation to come from one who is even now considering setting forth on a five-year excavating contest in search of the remains of our gibbering ancestor, the First Man!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s great news.


Speaker 2 : Aha! Now we come to the Missing Link!
Speaker 1 : Darn your Barnum and Bailey circus lingo, Big. This isn't a thing to mock at. I should think the origin of man would be something that would appeal even to your hothouse imagination. Modern science believes.knows.that Asia was the first home of the human race. That's where we're going, to the great Central Asian plateau north of the Himalayas.
Speaker 2 : And there you hope to dig up.our first ancestor?
Speaker 1 : It's a chance in a million, but I believe we may, myself.at least find authentic traces of him so that we can reconstruct his life and habits. I was up in that country a lot while I was mining advisor to the Chinese government.did some of my own work on the side. The extraordinary results I obtained with the little means at my disposal convinced me of the riches yet to be uncovered. The First Man may be among them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes thats right. The asian plateau was a success so I hope this will be too


Speaker 2 : Yes, I've always been with him.
Speaker 1 : You bet she has. Martha's more efficient than a whole staff of assistants and secretaries. She knows more about what I'm doing than I do half the time. Well, I guess I'll go in and work some.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no no. you have been of great help. Please cool down. I can take it from here


Speaker 2 : Yes, if you two want to work together, why just shoo me.
Speaker 1 : No. Sit down, Big. I don't need Martha now. I couldn't deprive Big of an audience for his confessions of a fond parent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no big! I never meant to cause anger in you by offending you. I am sorry if it sounded like that.


Speaker 2 : Poor Curt.
Speaker 1 : I had forgotten.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no its understandable. Given your situations at work, it better for yourself and the kids


Speaker 2 : How old were they when.?
Speaker 1 : Three years and two.both girls. We had a nice little house in Goldfield. We were very respectable home folks then. The wandering came later, after.It was a Sunday in winter when Curt and I had gone visiting some friends. The nurse girl fell asleep.or something.and the children sneaked out in their underclothes and played in the snow. Pneumonia set in.and a week later they were both dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know its difficult to digest but it was a really tough time for both of us. We have been doing better now.


Speaker 2 : We were real lunatics for a time. And then when we'd calmed down enough to realize.how things stood with us.we swore we'd never have children again.to steal away their memory. It wasn't what you thought.romanticism.that set Curt wandering.and me with him. It was a longing to lose ourselves.to forget. He flung himself with all his power into every new study that interested him. He couldn't keep still, mentally or bodily.and I followed. He needed me.then.so dreadfully!
Speaker 1 : And is it that keeps driving him on now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish we could do something but I just hope it all works out in the end for you and curt.


Speaker 2 : And with you, too?
Speaker 1 : Well, I've helped.all I could. His work has me in it, I like to think.and I have him.
Speaker 2 : I think people are foolish to stand by such an oath as you took.forever. Children are a great comfort in one's old age, I've tritely found.
Speaker 1 : Old age!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so scared. I am sure forty wont be as fatal as you make it sound.


Speaker 2 : You're not very tactful, I must say. Don't you know I'm thirty-eight?
Speaker 1 : A woman is as old as she looks. You're not thirty yet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you absolutely have to.


Speaker 2 : Hello, Martha. Hello, Big. I walked right in regardless. Hope I'm not interrupting.
Speaker 1 : Not at all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he wont make me regret it


Speaker 2 : The past is never past for a dog with a bad name, eh, Lily? If you want to reward me for my truthfulness, Mrs. Jayson, help me take the kids for an airing in the car. I know it's an imposition but they've grown to expect you. By Jove, I'll have to run along. I'll get them and then pick you up here. Is that all right?
Speaker 1 : Fine.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good bye!


Speaker 2 : You were forgetting, weren't you?
Speaker 1 : What?
Speaker 2 : That you'd invited all the family over here to tea this afternoon. I'm the advance guard.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no come on. Don’t be upset over such a thing. I am sure must have just slipped your mind


Speaker 1 : Do you like Bigelow?
Speaker 2 : Yes, very much. And Curt thinks the world of him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool over this. I am sure the family loves you guys equally and we would never think of you as unconventional


Speaker 1 : I think it's very fine of him.
Speaker 2 : His reform is too sudden. He's joined the hypocrites, I think.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah you are probably right. He isnt a hypocrite


Speaker 1 : Oh, I know he's a good actor. Lots of women have been in love with him. You won't be furious if I'm very, very frank, will you, Martha?
Speaker 2 : No, of course not, Lily.
Speaker 1 : Well, I'm the bearer of a message from the Jayson family.
Speaker 2 : A message? For me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? The entire family thinks so?


Speaker 1 : I? Unwisely intimate.? Well, you sure are funny people!
Speaker 2 : No, we're not funny. We'd be all right if we were. On the contrary, we're very dull and deadly. Bigelow really has a villainous rep. for philandering. But, of course, you didn't know that.
Speaker 1 : No, I didn't.and I don't care to know it now.
Speaker 2 : I told them you wouldn't relish their silly advice. Oh, I hate their narrow small-town ethics as much as you do, Martha. I sympathize with you, indeed I do. But I have to live with them and so, for comfort's sake, I've had to make compromises. And you're going to live in our midst from now on, aren't you? Well then, you'll have to make compromises, too.if you want any peace.
Speaker 1 : But-compromises about what? I refuse to take it seriously. How anyone could think.it's too absurd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I never noticed that. Thanks for pointing it out


Speaker 2 : But it was on account of his children. They were always with him.
Speaker 1 : The town doesn't trust this sudden fond parenthood, Martha. We've known him too long, you see.
Speaker 2 : But he's Curt's oldest and best friend.
Speaker 1 : We've found they always are.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. I never mean to insinuate anything wrong from your end. But we don’t know what's in his head.


Speaker 2 : Go to the devil. I knew you'd say that. Well, fight the good fight. You have all my best wishes. I wish I had something worth fighting for. Now that I'm through with college, my occupation's gone. All I do is read book after book. The only live people are the ones in books, I find, and the only live life.
Speaker 1 : You're lonely, that's what, Lily.
Speaker 2 : Don't pity me, Martha.or I'll join the enemy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I am not even thinking of it yet


Speaker 1 : Martha! How banal! The men I see are enough to banish that thought if I ever had it.
Speaker 2 : Marriage isn't only the man. It's children. Wouldn't you like to have children?
Speaker 1 : Wouldn't you?
Speaker 2 : But.Lily.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes but kids is a scary thing at this age!


Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : Then why don't you.before it's too late? You won't want to tag along with Curt to the ends of the earth forever, will you? Wasn't that queer life like any other? I mean, didn't it get to pall on you?
Speaker 1 : Yes.perhaps.in the last two years.
Speaker 2 : It's time for both of you to rest on your laurels. Why can't Curt keep on with what he's doing now.stay home and write his books?
Speaker 1 : Curt isn't that kind. The actual work.the romance of it.that's his life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right I would be alone. But please don’t be so down about that. I have made my plans for when curt isnt here


Speaker 2 : Horribly. I don't know what I'll do.
Speaker 1 : Then why.why? Think, Martha. If Curt knew.that was to happen.he'd want to stay here with you. I'm sure he would.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t blame him. He really loved them


Speaker 2 : If you confronted Curt with the actual fact, he'd be reconciled soon enough, and happy in the bargain.
Speaker 1 : Do you really think so?
Speaker 2 : And you, Martha.I can tell from the way you've talked that you'd like to.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I.I never thought I'd ever want to again. For many years after they died I never once dreamed of it. But lately.the last years.I've felt.and when we came to live here.and I saw all around me.homes.and children, I.
Speaker 2 : I know. You must, that's all there is to it! If you want my advice, you go right ahead and don't tell Curt until it's a fact he'll have to learn to like, willy-nilly. You'll find, in his inmost heart, he'll be tickled to death.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I.I'll confess I thought of that. In spite of my fear, I.I've.I mean.I.
Speaker 2 : Why, Martha, what. Martha! I know! It is so, isn't it? It is!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay lets not loose our cool and figure out a way to break this news to him


Speaker 1 : You dear, you! How long have you known?
Speaker 2 : For over two months.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was funny! I hope everybody is happy


Speaker 1 : We'll get you married, young lady, and that very soon. What you need to bring you down to earth is a husband and the responsibility of children. Every woman who is able should have children. Don't you believe that, Martha Jayson?
Speaker 2 : Yes, I do, Mrs. Davidson.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you aunt


Speaker 1 : You want my help?
Speaker 2 : Yes.not for long.just a few notes before I forget them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course! Please take your time.


Speaker 1 : They died, Aunt, as children have a bad habit of doing. However, I wouldn't despair if I were you.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean, Lily? What are you so mysterious about? What did she say? What.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay lily please don’t get angry. I dint mean to cause you any hurt. Be at peace while having your tea


Speaker 1 : Stop fooling, Lily. Let's get to our muttons. Did you talk with Martha?
Speaker 2 : I did, sir.
Speaker 1 : What did she say?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok ok we get it. We wont be meddling in her business


Speaker 2 : They have become such well-behaved and intelligent children, they say.
Speaker 1 : You'd better let Martha train yours for a while, Emily. I'm sure she'd improve their manners.though, of course, she couldn't give them any intelligence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you I am deeply sorry. It was just a suggestion but now I can see it was taken the wrong way


Speaker 2 : The idea! She takes a lot upon herself.the daughter of a Wild Western coal-miner.
Speaker 1 : Gold miner, Aunt.
Speaker 2 : It makes no difference.a common miner! 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I never realised it


Speaker 1 : Martha told me. I know that.
Speaker 2 : And does Curt know this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : her fear is justifiable. Lets not be tensed for them yet and see how he reacts


Speaker 1 : Ssshh, you empty barrel! I think I hear.
Speaker 2 : How do you do, everybody? So sorry I wasn't here when you came. I hope Lily made proper excuses for me. I hope Lily.but I see you've all had tea.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay good! You do make a good hostess


Speaker 1 : We were talking about you.at least, we were listening to Lily talk about you.
Speaker 2 : About me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words. I consider it my work as well.


Speaker 1 : Wait a second! I'm coming with you.
Speaker 2 : Sure thing.only hurry, darn you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank goodness


Speaker 1 : She's a bad ally to rely on.this side of the fence one day, and that the next.
Speaker 2 : Is that why you advised her to become a lawyer, Mr. Sheffield?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry with me. I am merely trying to understand your advice


Speaker 1 : To play host, you big bear, you! Don't you think we came to see you, too? Sit down here and be good.
Speaker 2 : Martha had to leave us to go motoring with Mr. Bigelow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh come on. Don’t be so scared of handling three children. I am sure you will do a tremendous job


Speaker 1 : No? What makes you so sure of that? I'll let you in on the secret.only you must all promise not to breathe a word to Martha.until to-morrow. To-morrow is her birthday, you know, and this is a surprise I've saved for her. I've been intriguing my damnedest for the past month to get permission for Martha to go with me. It was difficult because women are supposed to be barred. But I've succeeded. The letter came this morning. How tickled to death she'll be when she hears! I know she's given up hope. I suppose it's that has been making her act so out-of-sorts lately.
Speaker 2 : Hmm! But would you persist in going.alone.if you knew it was impossible for her.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely!


Speaker 1 : No. SHE cannot go. And it is YOUR duty.
Speaker 2 : Oh, come! That's all nonsense, Aunt. You don't understand the kind of woman Martha is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point aunt. I dint mean to make you angry. I am only pointing out that we have no children.


Speaker 1 : But we have no children now, Aunt.
Speaker 2 : I know that, more's the pity. But later.
Speaker 1 : No, I tell you! It's impossible!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok aunt if you insist on it


Speaker 2 : Listen to that rumpus, will you! The kids are having the time of their lives. Your wife is playing hide and seek with them. Come and look.
Speaker 1 : Oh, I can see well enough from here.
Speaker 2 : She seems to get as much fun out of it as they do. Ah, Eddy discovered her behind the tree. Isn't he tickled now! Jove, what a hand she is with children!
Speaker 1 : Oh, Martha gets along well with anyone.
Speaker 2 : You think so? With everyone?
Speaker 1 : Yes.with everyone we've ever come in contact with.even aboriginal natives.
Speaker 2 : With the aboriginal natives of Bridgetown? With the well-known Jayson family, for example?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Sometimes books have that power. 


Speaker 1 : Too darn preoccupied, if you'll pardon my saying so. It's not fair to leave her to fight it alone.
Speaker 2 : Fight what? Martha has a sense of humor. I'm sure their petty prejudices merely amuse her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I have seen you get worked up about a mosquito before. Is everything all right?


Speaker 1 : You speak from experience, eh?
Speaker 2 : You bet I do. Touch me anywhere and you'll find a bite. This, my native town, did me the honor of devoting its entire leisure attention for years to stinging me to death.
Speaker 1 : Well, if I am to believe one-tenth of the family letters I used to receive on the subject of my old friend, Bigelow, they sure had just cause.
Speaker 2 : Oh, I'll play fair. I'll admit they did.then. But it's exasperating to know they never give you credit for changing.I almost said, reforming, One ought to be above the gossip of a town like this.but say what you like, it does get under your skin.
Speaker 1 : So you'd like to be known as a reformed character, eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its nothing to be afraid of. I am doing well without them


Speaker 2 : Yes, I suppose so.if you're made that way.
Speaker 1 : Meaning you're not?
Speaker 2 : Not any more. I tried that once.
Speaker 1 : But we're wandering from the subject of Martha versus the mosquitoes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I trust you. I know you will do well to take care of martha so don’t be so sad.


Speaker 2 : Where do you think of settling her then?
Speaker 1 : No settling about it. I'm going to take her with me.
Speaker 2 : On the Asian expedition?
Speaker 1 : Yes. I haven't told her yet but I'm going to to-day. It's her birthday.and I've been saving the news to surprise her with.
Speaker 2 : Her birthday? I wish the children and I had known.but it's not too late yet.
Speaker 1 : Thirty-nine candles, if you're thinking of baking a cake!
Speaker 2 : That's not old.but it's not young either, Curt.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah you are right. Martha has always been a young spirit


Speaker 1 : I've had to run away and leave them with the governess. They're too active for me. Phew! I'm all tired out. I must be getting old.
Speaker 2 : Big was just this minute remarking that, Martha.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I don’t mean for you to get angry and declare. Please think this through


Speaker 1 : He.prevaricates, Mrs. Jayson.
Speaker 2 : There now, Curt! I'm sure it was you who said it. It sounds just like one of your horrid facts.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your kind words Curt!


Speaker 1 : There they go. What darlings they are! Whoever did say it was right, Curt, I am getting old.
Speaker 2 : Nonsense!
Speaker 1 : No. I feel it.
Speaker 2 : Nonsense! You're not the sort that ever grows old.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid of getting old. Everybody has to some day.


Speaker 1 : You haven't any silver threads. Am I to suspect.?
Speaker 2 : No, I don't. Honest, cross my heart, I wouldn't even conceal that from you, if I did. But gray hairs prove nothing. I am actually older than you, don't forget.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to sound frightful. Lets forget about silver threads


Speaker 1 : I'm a woman, remember; so that one means at least six. Ugh! Let's not talk about it. Do you know, it really fills me with a queer panic sometimes?
Speaker 2 : Silly girl!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! Never be sad about that. I will always love you


Speaker 1 : Martha! What a foolish question, sweetheart. If we ever have to grow old, we'll do it together just as we've always done everything.
Speaker 2 : That's my dream of happiness, Curt. Oh, it has been a wonderful, strange life we've lived together, Curt, hasn't it? You're sure you've never regretted.never had the weest doubt that it might have been better with.someone else?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey I dint mean to anger you. It was just a hypothetical question Curt.


Speaker 1 : And I have helped.really helped you, haven't I?
Speaker 2 : You've been the best wife a man could ever wish for, Martha. You've been.you are wonderful. I owe everything to you.your sympathy and encouragement. Don't you know I realize that?
Speaker 1 : Yes, it's been a wonderful, glorious life. I'd live it over again if I could, every single second of it.even the terrible suffering.the children.
Speaker 2 : Don't. I wouldn't want that over again. But why have you been putting all our life into the past tense? It seems to me the most interesting part is still ahead of us.
Speaker 1 : I mean.together.Curt.
Speaker 2 : So do I!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s sad. I wish you could though!


Speaker 1 : Yes, that does complicate matters, doesn't it?
Speaker 2 : Curt! How indifferently you say that.as if you didn't care!
Speaker 1 : What do you think you'll do all the time I'm gone?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad. You know I will be back soon and you have all your family and friends here. You will do just fine


Speaker 2 : Unless what?
Speaker 1 : Oh, Curt, I love you so! Swear that you'll always love me no matter what I do.no matter what I ask.
Speaker 2 : But, sweetheart.
Speaker 1 : Then don't go!
Speaker 2 : Why, I've got to go. You know that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be upset. I will be back soon


Speaker 1 : But, Martha.you said you'd be lonely unless.unless what?
Speaker 2 : Unless I. I mean we.oh, I'm so afraid of what you'll.hold me close, very close to you and I'll whisper it.
Speaker 1 : But that's impossible, Martha!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Martha! Please don’t be angry. I understand you wanted to keep it a secret. I don’t blame you for anything


Speaker 2 : You mean it.is a fact?
Speaker 1 : Yes. Oh, Curt, don't look that way! You seem so cold.so far away from me. Why don't you hold me close to you? Why don't you say you're glad.for my sake?
Speaker 2 : But Martha.you don't understand. How can I pretend gladness when. Why, it would spoil all our plans!
Speaker 1 : Plans? OUR plans? What do you mean?
Speaker 2 : Why, you're going with me, of course! I've obtained official permission. I've been working for it for months. The letter came yesterday morning.
Speaker 1 : Permission.to go with you.
Speaker 2 : Yes. I couldn't conceive going without you. And I knew how you must be wishing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t sound so dull. I meant to tell you about the permission and I thought you would be happy.


Speaker 1 : Martha! You don't mean to tell me you weren't!
Speaker 2 : I was wishing you would finally decide not to go.to stay at home.
Speaker 1 : But you must realize that's impossible. Martha, are you sure you've clearly understood what I've told you? You can go with me, do you hear? Everything is arranged. And I've had to fight so hard.I was running the risk of losing my own chance by my insistence that I couldn't go without you.
Speaker 2 : I understand all that, Curt.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t hesitate on will curt, I have my reasons!


Speaker 1 : I realize all that, Curt.
Speaker 2 : You can't.and hesitate! And then.think, Martha!.it will mean that you and I won't have to be separated. We can go on living the old, free life together.
Speaker 1 : You are forgetting.what I told you, Curt. You must face the fact. I cannot go.
Speaker 2 : How long have you known.this?
Speaker 1 : Two months, about.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to get a hold of your temper. I dint mean to hide anything from you. Please understand that


Speaker 2 : I was afraid you wouldn't understand.and you haven't, Curt. But why didn't you tell me before.what you were planning?
Speaker 1 : You mean.then.you would have been glad to go.before this had happened?
Speaker 2 : I would have accepted it.
Speaker 1 : Martha, how could you ever have allowed this to happen? Oh, I suppose I'm talking foolishness. It wasn't your seeking, I know.
Speaker 2 : Yes it was, Curt. I wished it. I sought it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh curt! I don’t know how to help you come out of this sadness. Please understand that its been long that our children died. They would want us to be happy


Speaker 1 : They forgive me, Curt. And you will forgive me, too.when you see him.and love him.
Speaker 2 : Him?
Speaker 1 : I know it will be a boy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am deeply to make you so angry and for hurting you. I really want him in our lives


Speaker 2 : You must make allowances for me. Curt, and forgive me. I AM getting old. No, it's the truth. I've reached the turning point. Will you listen to my side of it, Curt, and try to see it.with sympathy.with true understanding..forgetting your work for the moment?
Speaker 1 : That's unfair, Martha. I think of it as OUR work.and I have always believed you did, too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am beginning to undersatnd your side Martha but It will take me sometime to come to terms with it.


Speaker 2 : Martha! And all the time I believed that more and more it was becoming the aim of your life, too.
Speaker 1 : I'm glad of that, dear. I tried my best to conceal it from you. It would have been so unfair to let you guess while we were still in harness. But oh, how I kept looking forward to the time when we would come back.and rest.in our own home! You know.you said that was your plan.to stay here and write your books.and I was hoping.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand my dear. We do have a lot to talk about


Speaker 2 : You've got to go. I won't try to stop you. I'll help all in my power.as I've always done. Only.I can't go with you any more. And you must help me.to do my work.by understanding it. Oh, Curt, I wish I could tell you what I feel, make you feel with me the longing for a child. If you had just the tiniest bit of feminine in you.! But you're so utterly masculine, dear! That's what has made me love you, I suppose.so I've no right to complain of it. I don't. I wouldn't have you changed one bit! I love you! And I love the things you love.your work.because it's a part of you. And that's what I want you to do.to reciprocate.to love the creator in me.to desire that I, too, should complete myself with the thing nearest my heart!
Speaker 1 : But I thought.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am beginning to understand how much has been going inside you. I wish you had tol me earlier but I am happy you have opened up to me ow.


Speaker 2 : Understand? No, I can't understand, Martha.
Speaker 1 : Curt! I don't believe you heard a word I was saying.
Speaker 2 : No, I can't understand. I cannot, cannot! It seems like treachery to me.
Speaker 1 : Curt!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to Curt! I have no choice


Speaker 2 : If you had listened to me.if you had even tried to feel.
Speaker 1 : I feel that you are deliberately ruining my highest hope. How can I go on without you? I've been trying to imagine myself alone. I can't! Even with my work.who can I get to take your place? Oh, Martha, why do you have to bring this new element into our lives at this late day? Haven't we been sufficient, you and I together? Isn't that a more difficult, beautiful happiness to achieve than.children? Everyone has children. Don't I love you as much as any man could love a woman? Isn't that enough for you? Doesn't it mean anything to you that I need you so terribly.for myself, for my work.for everything that is best and worthiest in me? Can you expect me to be glad when you propose to introduce a stranger who will steal away your love, your interest.who will separate us and deprive me of you! No, no, I cannot! It's asking the impossible. I am only human.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its not like I don’t but I am not happy about my plans beings ruined. Please give me some time.


Speaker 2 : I do! It is OUR life I am fighting for, not mine.OUR life that you want to destroy.
Speaker 1 : Our life seems to mean your life to you, Curt.and only your life. I have devoted fifteen years to that. Now I must fight for my own.
Speaker 2 : You talk as if we were enemies, Martha! No, you don't mean it! I love you so, Martha! You've made yourself part of my life, my work.I need you so! I can't share you with anyone! I won't! Martha, my own! Say that you won't, dear?
Speaker 1 : Curt! Curt! It won't separate us, dear. Can't you see he will be a link between us.even when we are away from each other.that he will bring us together all the closer?
Speaker 2 : But I can't be away from you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know you would. All right! I will try my best to enjoy these moments without you and then rush back to you.


Speaker 1 : You will not do what I have implored you.for me! And I am looking the fact in the face.the fact that there must be no fact! There are doctors who.
Speaker 2 : Curt! You propose that.to me! Oh, Curt! When I feel him.his life within me.like a budding of my deepest soul.to flower and continue me.you say what you have just said! Oh, you never, never, never will understand!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh Curt! Don’t be so sad about it. Lets work together and we can get through anything


Speaker 1 : It must be now.or not at all.at my age, dear. You have changed, Curt. I remember it used to be your happiness to sacrifice yourself for me.
Speaker 2 : I had no work then.no purpose beyond myself. To sacrifice oneself is easy. But when your only meaning becomes as a searcher for knowledge.you cannot sacrifice that, Martha. You must sacrifice everything for that.or lose all sincerity.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its not that. My work is important that’s all.


Speaker 1 : Yes and no. You can't understand, Martha! ...
Speaker 2 : Nor you.
Speaker 1 : And you and your work? Aren't they one and the same?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry Martha. I just miss being us. I understand now so lets talk more and come to an understandinng shall we?


Speaker 2 : Nonsense! You talk as if love were an intellectual process. I love you.always and forever! You are me and I am you. What use is all this vivisecting?
Speaker 1 : Yes, you love me. But who am I? There is no recognition in your eyes. You don't know.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you sad but really I don’t have a recognition. Please try and understand it.


Speaker 2 : Well?
Speaker 1 : No change, sir. God, Dad, I can't stand her moaning and screaming! It's got my nerves shot to pieces. I thought I was hardened. I've heard them out in No Man's Land.dying by inches.when you couldn't get to them or help.but this is worse.a million times! After all, that was war.and they were men.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right dad she is very sad about all that’s happening currently.


Speaker 2 : Since three o'clock this morning.yesterday morning, I should say. It's a wonder she isn't dead.
Speaker 1 : Where is Curt?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : calm down. Let me talk to him. I am sure he has a reason. Without hearing his side, lets not get angry okay?


Speaker 2 : Why didn't you make him come in?
Speaker 1 : Make him! It's easy to say. He's in a queer state, Dad, I can tell you! There's something torturing him besides her pain.
Speaker 2 : Yes, there's a lot in all this we don't know about.
Speaker 1 : I suppose the reason he's so down on the family is because we've rather cut her since that tea affair.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry on anybody right now dad. Lets hear them both out and we can maybe help them sort it out.


Speaker 2 : And yet he keeps asking everyone to send for Bigelow.says he wants to talk to him.not us. WE can't understand!
Speaker 1 : I'm afraid Curt knows we understand too much. But why does he want Bigelow, in God's name? In his present state.with the suspicions he must have.there's liable to be a frightful scene.
Speaker 2 : Don't be afraid of a scene. The hell of it is he seems to regard Bigelow as his best friend. Damned if I can make it out.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please put your anger aside for now. Lets see what bigelow has to say about all this.


Speaker 1 : I thought I went through something when mine were born.but this is too awful.
Speaker 2 : And, according to John, Curt actually says he hates it! Isn't that terrible? It's almost as if her suffering was a punishment, don't you think?
Speaker 1 : If it is, she's being punished enough, Heaven knows. It can't go on this way much longer or something dreadful will happen.
Speaker 2 : Do you think the baby.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That's what I think.


Speaker 1 : Don't forget I have to be at the bank in the morning.
Speaker 2 : I have to be at the bank, too.and you don't notice me sleeping. Tell me about Curt. You just left him, didn't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t start getting sad and pitying yourself. What you did was right for the moment


Speaker 1 : Has he quieted down, that's what I want to know?
Speaker 2 : Not the least bit. He's out of his head.and I'd be out of mine if a child was being born to my wife that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure everybody knows by now


Speaker 1 : Inside. I think he'll be with us in a minute. Just now he's 'phoning to Bigelow.
Speaker 2 : For God's sake, couldn't you stop him?
Speaker 1 : Not without a scene. Your Aunt persuaded him to come into the house.and he rushed for the 'phone. I think he guessed we had been lying to him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am sure he will be here soon


Speaker 2 : Curt. Remember I'm your father. Can't you confide in me? I'll do anything to help.
Speaker 1 : No, Dad. Leave me alone.
Speaker 2 : As you wish.
Speaker 1 : And send Big in to me as soon as he comes.
Speaker 2 : Very well.if you insist.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok ok calm down. Tell me whats going on?


Speaker 1 : I got over as soon as I could. By Jove, old man, you look as though you'd been through hell!
Speaker 2 : I have. I am.
Speaker 1 : Buck up! How's Martha?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please put your anger aside and tell me whats going on. I am sure you both will be fine.


Speaker 2 : You're surely not worrying, are you? Martha is so strong and healthy there's no doubt of her pulling through in fine shape.
Speaker 1 : She should never have attempted this. I've a grudge against you, Big. It was you bringing your children over here that first planted this in her mind.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure I can say that I understand but you looking so down wont help Mrtha


Speaker 2 : Oh, for God's sake! I didn't want you here to discuss Bridgetown gossip.
Speaker 1 : I know, old man, forgive me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure I can say that I understand but you looking so sad wont help Mrtha


Speaker 2 : Deuce take it, Curt, what's the matter with you? I never thought you'd turn morbid.
Speaker 1 : I've changed, Big.I hardly know myself any more.
Speaker 2 : Once you're back on the job again, you'll be all right. You're still determined to go on this expedition, aren't you?
Speaker 1 : Yes. I was supposed to join them this week in New York but I've arranged to catch up with them in China.as soon as it's possible for us to go.
Speaker 2 : Us? You mean you still plan to take.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good then. I am glad you are happy about this trip.


Speaker 1 : Yes, but.do you think it would be safe to take the child?
Speaker 2 : Yes.I was forgetting the child, wasn't I? But perhaps. Oh, damn all children, Big!
Speaker 1 : Curt!
Speaker 2 : I can't help it.I've fought against it. But it's there.deep down in me.and I can't drive it out. I can't!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we both need to calm down. Lets breathe and get our anger down. We need to talk with a peaceful mind.


Speaker 1 : Hatred! Yes, hatred! What's the use of denying it? I must tell someone and you're the only one who might understand. For you.hated your wife, didn't you?
Speaker 2 : Good God, you don't mean you hate.Martha?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Don’t look so sad. I dint mean to hurt you I am just trying to understand your situation with martha. I am sure you love her more than anything.


Speaker 1 : Curt! Don't you know you can't talk like that.now.when
Speaker 2 : It has made us both suffer torments.not only now.every day, every hour, for months and months. Why shouldn't I hate it, eh?
Speaker 1 : Curt! Can't you realize how horrible.
Speaker 2 : Yes, it's horrible. I've told myself that a million times. But it's true!
Speaker 1 : Shut up! You're not yourself. Come, think for a moment. What would Martha feel if she heard you going on this way? Why.it would kill her!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey please calm down. You are the one she needs the most at this moment


Speaker 2 : This is only your damned imagination. They put you out because you were in their way, that's all. And as for Martha, she was probably suffering so much.
Speaker 1 : No. She read it in my eyes. I saw that look in hers.of horror.horror of me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we both need to calm down. Lets breathe and get our anger down. We need to talk with a peaceful mind.


Speaker 2 : It came home to her then.the undeniable truth. Isn't it fiendish that I should be the one to add to her torture.in spite of myself.in spite of all my will to conceal it! She will never forgive me, never! And how can I forgive myself?
Speaker 1 : For God's sake, don't think about it! It's absurd.ridiculous!
Speaker 2 : She's guessed it ever since that day when we quarreled.her birthday. Oh, you can have no idea of the misery there has been in our lives since then. You haven't seen or guessed the reason. No one has. It has been.the thought of IT.
Speaker 1 : Curt!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its all sounds very joyoous but what if she changed her mind?


Speaker 2 : But that life was your life, Curt.
Speaker 1 : No, it was her life, too.her work as well as mine. She had made the life, our life.the work, our work. Had she the right to repudiate what she had built because she suddenly has a fancy for a home, children, a miserable ease! I had thought I was her home, her children. I had tried to make my life worthy of being that to her. And I had failed. I was not enough.
Speaker 2 : Curt!
Speaker 1 : Oh, I tried to become reconciled. I tried my damnedest. I tried to love this child as I had loved those that died. But I couldn't. And so, this being estranged us. We loved as intensely as ever but IT pushed us apart. I grew to dread the idea of this intruder. She saw this in me. I denied it.but she knew. There was something in each of us the other grew to hate. And still we loved as never before, perhaps, for we grew to pity each other's helplessness.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ot yet! Do you think I should?


Speaker 2 : One day, when I was trying to imagine myself without her, and finding nothing but hopelessness.yet knowing I must go.a thought suddenly struck me.a horrible but fascinating possibility that had never occurred to me before. Can you guess what it was?
Speaker 1 : No. And I think you've done enough morbid raving, if you ask me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is not what she would say a happy ending would be Curt!


Speaker 2 : Curt!
Speaker 1 : Yes. My thought was that the child might be born dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have tried my best. I keep making everybody so sad. I will try to be better for her.


Speaker 2 : I've tried. I cannot. There is some inexorable force in me.
Speaker 1 : Do you realize how contemptible this confession makes you out? Why, if you had one trace of human kindness in you.one bit of unselfish love for your wife.one particle of pity for her suffering.
Speaker 2 : I have.all the love and pity in the world for her! That's why I can't help hating.the cause of her suffering.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : since you put it like that it does sound like a nice way to pay her back for all she has done.


Speaker 1 : She can be happy without me. She will have this child.to take my place. You think I would not give up my work for her? But I would! I will stay here.do anything she wishes.if only we can make a new beginning again.together.ALONE!
Speaker 2 : Curt, for God's sake, don't return to that! Why, good God, man.even now.while you're speaking.don't you realize what may be happening? And you can talk as if you were wishing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please keep this in your thoughts


Speaker 1 : Sh-h-h, they say this is the crisis. Bear up, my boy, it will soon be over now.
Speaker 2 : She has stopped.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Let us all give thanks to God!


Speaker 1 : So it's a boy.
Speaker 2 : Did you hear Curt.how he yelled out "No"? It's plain as the nose on your face he didn't want.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he must be going through something. Lets not get sad without knowing what it is.


Speaker 1 : Nurse! What is the matter?
Speaker 2 : His wife is dead. She lived just long enough to recognize him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh, it's a fine, healthy baby.eleven pounds.that's what made it so difficult.


Speaker 1 : Yes. Martha! Gone! Dead! Oh! Her eyes.she knew me.she smiled.she whispered.forgive me, Curt,.forgive her.when it was I who should have said forgive me.but before I could.she.
Speaker 2 : Oh!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are in a lot of pain and don’t know what you are saying. Please try to calm down. Be with martha for now. 


Speaker 1 : Please do sit down, Aunt. And do stop crying.
Speaker 2 : What ridiculous things funerals are, anyway! That stupid minister.whining away through his nose! Why does the Lord show such a partiality for men with adenoids, I wonder.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I wasn’t trying to be disrespectful. I just pointed out something I noticed.


Speaker 1 : Oh, I hate you, all of you! I loathe your suspicions.and I loathe myself because I'm beginning to be poisoned by them, too.
Speaker 2 : Really, Lily, at this late hour.after the way Curt has acted.and her last words when she was dying.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I just hope you understand


Speaker 1 : But, if Bigelow should fail.
Speaker 2 : Then we'll succeed. By God, we'll have to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Don’t be angry. Let me talk to him


Speaker 1 : Curt, damn it, wake up! Are you made of stone? Has everything I've said gone in one ear and out the other? I know it's hell for me to torment you at this particular time but it's your own incredibly unreasonable actions that force me to. I know how terribly you must feel but.damn it, man, postpone this going away! Face this situation like a man! Be reconciled to your child, stay with him at least until you can make suitable arrangements.
Speaker 2 : I will never see it! Never!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please cool your anger down. I don’t want to see it yet but I will for martha's sake


Speaker 1 : No. If I saw it I'd be tempted to. No more of that talk, Big. I've heard enough. I've reached the limit.
Speaker 2 : That's your final answer, eh? Well, I'm through. I've done all I could. If you want to play the brute.to forget all that was most dear in the world to Martha.to go your own damn selfish way.well, there's nothing more to be said. You will be punished for it, believe me! And I.I want you to understand that all friendship ceases between us from this day. You are not the Curt I thought I knew.and I have nothing but a feeling of repulsion.good-by.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good bye


Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : Then Mr. Bigelow didn't persuade you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay if that’s what is your decision


Speaker 1 : What time is it?
Speaker 2 : You have plenty of time to listen to what I.I should rather say we.have to ask you, Curt. I promise to be brief. But first let me again impress upon you that I am talking in a spirit of the deepest friendliness and sympathy with you.as a fellow-member of the same family, I may say.and with the highest ideals and the honor of that family always in view. First, let me ask you, is it your intention to take that five o'clock train to-day?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry about this. I hope you have a safe trip


Speaker 1 : And then you'll join this expedition to Asia?
Speaker 2 : You know that.
Speaker 1 : To be gone five years?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would request you to keep your anger aside and think twice about it.


Speaker 2 : Is it your intention to return here at any time before you leave for Asia?
Speaker 1 : No!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Absolutely yes. my determination is irrevocable


Speaker 2 : Irrevocable! Exactly. Please remember that.
Speaker 1 : That being your attitude, I will come bluntly to the core of the whole matter.the child whose coming into the world cost Martha her life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please think rationally about this. The child cant be blamed for it right? But I guess you are not in a state to understand this yet. Maybe some time later you might.


Speaker 2 : You can hardly hold the child responsible for the terrible outcome. Women die every day from the same cause. Why do you attribute guilt to the child in this case, Curt?
Speaker 1 : It lives and Martha is gone.But, enough! I've said I never wanted it mentioned to me. Will you please remember that?
Speaker 2 : Its name is Jayson. Curt.in the eyes of the law. Will YOU please remember that?
Speaker 1 : I don't want to remember anything! Please, for God's sake, leave me alone!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sad for me. I am getting accustomed to it now.


Speaker 2 : Why not? Am I not alone.more alone this minute than any creature on God's earth?
Speaker 1 : In your great grief. Yes, yes, of course. We all appreciate.and we hate to. Yes, it would be much wiser to postpone these practical considerations until you are in a calmer mood. And if you will only give us the chance.why not put off this precipitate departure.for a month, say.and in the meantime.
Speaker 2 : I am going when I said I was. I must get away from this horrible hole.as far away as I can. I must get back to my work for only in it will I find Martha again. But you.you can't understand that. What is the good of all this talking which leads nowhere?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your temper and understand that I need some alone time right now. I understand why you are concerned but I just need some time


Speaker 1 : In the world's eyes, it will appear precious like a desertion on your part.
Speaker 2 : Oh, arrange it to suit yourselves.anything you wish.
Speaker 1 : I'll take you at your word. Then let us arrange it this way. You will remain here a month longer at least.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please keep your anger aside and think that you can make plans in that time.


Speaker 2 : It's all very well for you to ignore what people in town think.you'll be in China or heaven knows where. The scandal won't touch you.but we've got to live here and have our position to consider.
Speaker 1 : Scandal? What scandal? Oh, you mean the imbecile busy-bodies will call me an unnatural father. Well, let them! I suppose I am. But they don't know.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? That’s a good thing then


Speaker 2 : What Emily means is simply this, Curt: You haven't even been to look at this child since it has been born.not once, have you?
Speaker 1 : No, and I never intend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so surprised. I am sure everyone has noticed it


Speaker 2 : Superiority, indeed!
Speaker 1 : Her breadth, of mind and greatness of soul that you couldn't understand. I've guessed all this, and if I haven't interfered it's only because I knew she was too far above you to notice your sickening malice.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absoultely right


Speaker 2 : I? Don't what, Curtis? My, how sick you look, poor boy!
Speaker 1 : You.don't believe.this child.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right! He is more lovely


Speaker 2 : Well.my answer to you.your rotten world.I kissed him.he is mine! He looked at me.it was as if Martha looked at me.through his eyes.
Speaker 1 : Oh, Curt! You won't go now? You'll stay?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry Curt. I will take care of Jayson while you are away


Speaker 2 : It will be a great happiness. He will be.the one God never granted me. God has answered my prayer at last.
Speaker 1 : I thank you, Aunt.
Speaker 2 : But I cannot approve of your running away like this. It isn't natural. But you always were a queer person.and a man must do faithfully the work ordained for him.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I must go! What would I be for him.or anyone.if I stayed? Thank God, you understand. But I will come back. When he is old enough, I will teach him to know and love a big, free life. Martha used to say that he would take her part in time. My goal shall be his goal, too. Martha shall live again for me in him. And you, Aunt, swear to keep him with you.out there in the country.never to let him know this obscene little world.
Speaker 2 : Yes, I promise, Curtis. Let anyone dare.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good bye my dear Curtis


Speaker 1 : You're not going, Curt?
Speaker 2 : Yes. Good-by, Lily. You loved her, didn't you? You are not like.Take my advice and get away before you become. But I see in your face it's too late.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you Lily.


Speaker 1 : What do you want? Stop where you are. You're positively dripping.
Speaker 2 : It's the Lord's own rain, my girl.
Speaker 1 : It's the devil's rain, I say.
Speaker 2 : Lord, how you talk, Regina. It's just this as I wanted to say.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am sorry to have scared you. I will lower down my volume


Speaker 1 : Asleep? In the middle of the day?
Speaker 2 : It's no business of yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Something must have happened for you to look so fearful


Speaker 1 : I can quite believe that.
Speaker 2 : Yes, we're weak vessels, we poor mortals, my girl.
Speaker 1 : So it seems.
Speaker 2 : .and temptations are manifold in this world, you see. But all the same, I was hard at work, God knows, at half-past five this morning.
Speaker 1 : Very well; only be off now. I won't stop here and have rendezvous's with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. Let me explain myself


Speaker 2 : I won't have any one find you here; so just you go about your business.
Speaker 1 : Blest if I go before I've had a talk with you. This afternoon I shall have finished my work at the school house, and then I shall take to-night's boat and be off home to the town.
Speaker 2 : Pleasant journey to you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that sounds great! No wonder you look so joyous


Speaker 1 : Oh!
Speaker 2 : You see, there's to be heaps of grand folks here to-morrow. Pastor Manders is expected from town, too.
Speaker 1 : He's coming to-day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad about it. I understand your position but can only hope that things get better for you.


Speaker 2 : Oho! is that your game?
Speaker 1 : Is what my game?
Speaker 2 : What are you going to fool Pastor Manders into doing, this time?
Speaker 1 : Sh! sh! Are you crazy? Do I want to fool Pastor Manders? Oh no! Pastor Manders has been far too good a friend to me for that. But I just wanted to say, you know.that I mean to be off home again to-night.
Speaker 2 : The sooner the better, say I.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but I want you with me, Regina.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey I don’t mean to make you angry. I was just asking you to come home with me


Speaker 2 : I want you to come home with me, I say.
Speaker 1 : Never in this world shall you get me home with you.
Speaker 2 : Oh, we'll see about that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. I hope I could change your opinions about my house. But maybe you could give it another thougth after calming down?


Speaker 1 : What the devil do you mean? Do you set yourself up against your father, you hussy?
Speaker 2 : You've said often enough I was no concern of yours.
Speaker 1 : Pooh! Why should you bother about that.
Speaker 2 : Haven't you many a time sworn at me and called me a.? Fi donc!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad now. I understand you must have used those words in anger but you should have atleast apologized


Speaker 1 : Oh, I remember very well what word you used.
Speaker 2 : Well, but that was only when I was a bit on, don't you know? Temptations are manifold in this world, Regina.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have upset you Regina.


Speaker 1 : And besides, it was when your mother was that aggravating.I had to find something to twit her with, my child. She was always setting up for a fine lady. "Let me go, Engstrand; let me be. Remember I was three years in Chamberlain Alving's family at Rosenvold." Mercy on us! She could never forget that the Captain was made a Chamberlain while she was in service here.
Speaker 2 : Poor mother! you very soon tormented her into her grave.
Speaker 1 : Oh, of course! I'm to have the blame for everything.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid. I wont ever do anything to scare you off of me like that


Speaker 2 : What do you say, my child?
Speaker 1 : Pied de mouton.
Speaker 2 : Is that English, eh?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : Ay, ay; you've picked up some learning out here; and that may come in useful now, Regina.
Speaker 1 : What do you want with me in town?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry father. I dint mean to insinuate that. 


Speaker 2 : Oh, don't try on any nonsense like that with me! Why do you want me?
Speaker 1 : Well, let me tell you, I've been thinking of setting up in a new line of business.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope this one turns out to be a success 


Speaker 2 : Yes, but this time you shall see, Regina! Devil take me.
Speaker 1 : Stop your swearing!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it does something good for you.


Speaker 2 : Have you? That's a good thing for you.
Speaker 1 : What can a man spend his ha'pence on here in this country hole?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand this country hole makes you angry too but lets come up with a solution together.


Speaker 2 : Why, you see, I thought of putting the money into some paying speculation. I thought of a sort of a sailor's tavern.
Speaker 1 : Pah!
Speaker 2 : A regular high-class affair, of course; not any sort of pig-sty for common sailors. No! damn it! it would be for captains and mates, and.and.regular swells, you know.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand this sailor's tavern idea makes you a little nervous too but I will need your help here


Speaker 1 : You were to help, to be sure. Only for the look of the thing, you understand. Devil a bit of hard work shall you have, my girl. You shall do exactly what you like.
Speaker 2 : Oh, indeed!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it has been fun to look after the children at the new orphanage


Speaker 1 : No; if things go as I want them to.Well there's no saying.there's no saying.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean by "there's no saying"?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am so glad to see you investes in my thoughts


Speaker 1 : What with one thing and another, a matter of seven or eight hundred crowns.
Speaker 2 : That's not so bad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s probably the sweetest I have heard you say to me.


Speaker 1 : Aren't you thinking of giving me any?
Speaker 2 : No, I'm blest if I am!
Speaker 1 : Not even of sending me a scrap of stuff for a new dress?
Speaker 2 : Come to town with me, my lass, and you'll soon get dresses enough.
Speaker 1 : Pooh! I can do that on my own account, if I want to.
Speaker 2 : No, a father's guiding hand is what you want, Regina. Now, I've got my eye on a capital house in Little Harbour Street. They don't want much ready-money; and it could be a sort of a Sailors' Home, you know.
Speaker 1 : But I will not live with you! I have nothing whatever to do with you. Be off!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank yo ufor your kind words father.


Speaker 2 : Well?
Speaker 1 : You'd soon get hold of some mate.or maybe even a captain.
Speaker 2 : I won't marry any one of that sort. Sailors have no savoir vivre.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to get you angry over something. It is just a thought I have begun to develop.


Speaker 1 : I know what sailors are, I tell you. They're not the sort of people to marry.
Speaker 2 : Then never mind about marrying them. You can make it pay all the same. He.the Englishman.the man with the yacht.he came down with three hundred dollars, he did; and she wasn't a bit handsomer than you.
Speaker 1 : Out you go!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just funny! I wouldn’t even imagine hitting you.


Speaker 2 : Yes, if you begin talking about mother I shall hit you. Get away with you, I say! And don't slam the doors. Young Mr. Alving.
Speaker 1 : He's asleep; I know. You're mightily taken up about young Mr. Alving. Oho! you don't mean to say it's him as.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay okay don’t be so alarmed. I am leaving


Speaker 2 : Good-morning, Miss Engstrand.
Speaker 1 : No, really! Good morning, Pastor Manders. Is the steamer in already?
Speaker 2 : It is just in. Terrible weather we have been having lately.
Speaker 1 : It's such blessed weather for the country, sir.
Speaker 2 : No doubt; you are quite right. We townspeople give too little thought to that.
Speaker 1 : Oh, mayn't I help you?.There! Why, how wet it is? I'll just hang it up in the hall. And your umbrella, too.I'll open it and let it dry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes sir. Thank you for asking.


Speaker 2 : Yes, thank you, sir.
Speaker 1 : You have your hands full, I suppose, in preparation for to-morrow?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I understand the amount of work you must be having


Speaker 2 : And Mrs Alving is at home, I trust?
Speaker 1 : Oh dear, yes. She's just upstairs, looking after the young master's chocolate.
Speaker 2 : Yes, by-the-bye.I heard down at the pier that Oswald had arrived.
Speaker 1 : Yes, he came the day before yesterday. We didn't expect him before to-day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes. Thanks for asking


Speaker 2 : Yes, thank you, quite; but dreadfully tired with the journey. He has made one rush right through from Paris.the whole way in one train, I believe. He's sleeping a little now, I think; so perhaps we'd better talk a little quietly.
Speaker 1 : Sh!.as quietly as you please.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes absolutely


Speaker 2 : Thanks, thanks, extremely so. Do you know, Miss Engstrand, I positively believe you have grown since I last saw you.
Speaker 1 : Do you think so, Sir? Mrs Alving says I've filled out too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank yo uso much sir. I have been told this quite a lot lately


Speaker 2 : Shall I tell Mrs Alving you are here?
Speaker 1 : Thanks, thanks, there is no hurry, my dear child..By-the-bye, Regina, my good girl, tell me: how is your father getting on out here?
Speaker 2 : Oh, thank you, sir, he's getting on well enough.
Speaker 1 : He called upon me last time he was in town.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : same here my dear


Speaker 2 : And you often look in upon him at his work, I daresay?
Speaker 1 : I? Oh, of course, when I have time, I.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are probably right about my father.


Speaker 2 : Oh, yes; I daresay he does.
Speaker 1 : He requires some one near him whom he cares for, and whose judgment he respects. He frankly admitted as much when he last came to see me.
Speaker 2 : Yes, he mentioned something of the sort to me. But I don't know whether Mrs Alving can spare me; especially now that we've got the new Orphanage to attend to. And then I should be so sorry to leave Mrs Alving; she has always been so kind to me.
Speaker 1 : But a daughter's duty, my good girl.Of course, we should first have to get your mistress's consent.
Speaker 2 : But I don't know whether it would be quite proper for me, at my age, to keep house for a single man.
Speaker 1 : What! My dear Miss Engstrand! When the man is your own father!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dear don’t be so sceptical. It will all work out


Speaker 2 : Why, my dear Regina.
Speaker 1 : .one I could love and respect, and be a daughter to.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but my dear, good child.
Speaker 1 : Then I should be glad to go to town. It's very lonely out here; you know yourself, sir, what it is to be alone in the world. And I can assure you I'm both quick and willing. Don't you know of any such place for me, sir?
Speaker 2 : I? No, certainly not.
Speaker 1 : But, dear, dear Sir, do remember me if.
Speaker 2 : Yes, yes, certainly, Miss Engstrand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dear don’t be so stressed. We shall remember you in time of need.


Speaker 1 : Welcome, my dear Pastor.
Speaker 2 : How do you do, Mrs Alving? Here I am as I promised.
Speaker 1 : Always punctual to the minute.
Speaker 2 : You may believe it was not so easy for me to get away. With all the Boards and Committees I belong to.
Speaker 1 : That makes it all the kinder of you to come so early. Now we can get through our business before dinner. But where is your portmanteau?
Speaker 2 : I left it down at the inn. I shall sleep there to-night.
Speaker 1 : Are you really not to be persuaded, even now, to pass the night under my roof?
Speaker 2 : No, no, Mrs Alving; many thanks. I shall stay at the inn, as usual. It is so conveniently near the landing-stage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh mrs alving you two old people have been doing so good so far and I am sure you will continue to do so.


Speaker 1 : Now you are making fun of me. Ah, you're naturally in great spirits to-day.what with to-morrow's festival and Oswald's return.
Speaker 2 : Yes; you can think what a delight it is to me! It's more than two years since he was home last. And now he has promised to stay with me all the winter.
Speaker 1 : Has he really? That is very nice and dutiful of him. For I can well believe that life in Rome and Paris has very different attractions from any we can offer here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course not! His mother is the best. How could anyone forget her.


Speaker 2 : It would be grievous indeed, if absence and absorption in art and that sort of thing were to blunt his natural feelings.
Speaker 1 : Yes, you may well say so. But there's nothing of that sort to fear with him. I'm quite curious to see whether you know him again. He'll be down presently; he's upstairs just now, resting a little on the sofa. But do sit down, my dear Pastor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes absolutely


Speaker 2 : Certainly.
Speaker 1 : Very well. Then let me show you. Now, to begin with, here is. Tell me, Mrs Alving, how do these books come to be here?
Speaker 2 : These books? They are books I am reading.
Speaker 1 : Do you read this sort of literature?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of! I never knew that.


Speaker 2 : Do you feel better or happier for such reading?
Speaker 1 : I feel, so to speak, more secure.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t look so surprised! It really more secure here.


Speaker 2 : Well, I seem to find explanation and confirmation of all sorts of things I myself have been thinking. For that is the wonderful part of it, Pastor Manders.there is really nothing new in these books, nothing but what most people think and believe. Only most people either don't formulate it to themselves, or else keep quiet about it.
Speaker 1 : Great heavens! Do you really believe that most people.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I respect your opinion. Lets put our anger aside now.


Speaker 2 : But surely not in this country? Not here among us?
Speaker 1 : Yes, certainly; here as elsewhere.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : initially I was also as shocked as you are but now it seems normal


Speaker 2 : For the rest, what do you object to in these books?
Speaker 1 : Object to in them? You surely do not suppose that I have nothing better to do than to study such publications as these?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. Your anger towards the publications is justified but could you please try to understand my opinion?


Speaker 2 : I have read enough about these writings to disapprove of them.
Speaker 1 : Yes; but your own judgment.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as always you are right!


Speaker 2 : Well, well, I daresay you're right there.
Speaker 1 : Besides, I of course do not deny that there may be much that is attractive in such books. Nor can I blame you for wishing to keep up with the intellectual movements that are said to be going on in the great world-where you have let your son pass so much of his life. But.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry I dint mean to anger you. I was merely pointing a fact about your son.


Speaker 2 : But one should not talk about it, Mrs Alving. One is certainly not bound to account to everybody for what one reads and thinks within one's own four walls.
Speaker 1 : Of course not; I quite agree with you.
Speaker 2 : Only think, now, how you are bound to consider the interests of this Orphanage, which you decided on founding at a time when.if I understand you rightly.you thought very differently on spiritual matters.
Speaker 1 : Oh, yes; I quite admit that. But it was about the Orphanage.
Speaker 2 : It was about the Orphanage we were to speak; yes. All I say is: prudence, my dear lady! And now let us get to business. Do you see these?
Speaker 1 : The documents?
Speaker 2 : All.and in perfect order. I can tell you it was hard work to get them in time. I had to put on strong pressure. The authorities are almost morbidly scrupulous when there is any decisive step to be taken. But here they are at last. See! here is the formal deed of gift of the parcel of ground known as Solvik in the Manor of Rosenvold, with all the newly constructed buildings, schoolrooms, master's house, and chapel. And here is the legal fiat for the endowment and for the Bye-laws of the Institution. Will you look at them? "Bye-laws for the Children's Home to be known as 'Captain Alving's Foundation.'"
Speaker 1 : So there it is.
Speaker 2 : I have chosen the designation "Captain" rather than "Chamberlain." "Captain" looks less pretentious.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for understanding. I hope it works out well.


Speaker 1 : And here you have the Bank Account of the capital lying at interest to cover the current expenses of the Orphanage.
Speaker 2 : Thank you; but please keep it.it will be more convenient.
Speaker 1 : With pleasure. I think we will leave the money in the Bank for the present. The interest is certainly not what we could wish.four per cent. and six months' notice of withdrawal. If a good mortgage could be found later on.of course it must be a first mortgage and an unimpeachable security.then we could consider the matter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words and trust


Speaker 2 : I will keep my eyes open at any rate..But now there is one thing more which I have several times been intending to ask you.
Speaker 1 : And what is that?
Speaker 2 : Shall the Orphanage buildings be insured or not?
Speaker 1 : Of course they must be insured.
Speaker 2 : Well, wait a moment, Mrs Alving. Let us look into the matter a little more closely.
Speaker 1 : I have everything insured; buildings and movables and stock and crops.
Speaker 2 : Of course you have.on your own estate. And so have I.of course. But here, you see, it is quite another matter. The Orphanage is to be consecrated, as it were, to a higher purpose.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but that's no reason.
Speaker 2 : For my own part, I should certainly not see the smallest impropriety in guarding against all contingencies.
Speaker 1 : No, I should think not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. We need to consider the feeling in the neighbourhood.


Speaker 2 : Well.the general feeling.
Speaker 1 : Is there any considerable number of people.really responsible people.who might be scandalised?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to se you so happy and interested about this I mean the interested people.


Speaker 2 : Well, I mean people in such independent and influential positions that one cannot help attaching some weight to their opinions.
Speaker 1 : There are several people of that sort here, who would very likely be shocked if.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Do you have a solution to this problem?


Speaker 2 : But for your own part, my dear Pastor, you can at least tell yourself that.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I know.I know; my conscience would be quite easy, that is true enough. But nevertheless we should not escape grave misinterpretation; and that might very likely react unfavourably upon the Orphanage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please don’t get angry. Loosing our temper in such delicate situations will do us no good. Lets cool our heads and think about something.


Speaker 2 : Nor can I entirely lose sight of the difficult.I may even say painful.position in which I might perhaps be placed. In the leading circles of the town, people take a lively interest in this Orphanage. It is, of course, founded partly for the benefit of the town, as well; and it is to be hoped it will, to a considerable extent, result in lightening our Poor Rates. Now, as I have been your adviser, and have had the business arrangements in my hands, I cannot but fear that I may have to bear the brunt of fanaticism.
Speaker 1 : Oh, you mustn't run the risk of that.
Speaker 2 : To say nothing of the attacks that would assuredly be made upon me in certain papers and periodicals, which.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well as you wish.


Speaker 1 : Then you do not wish the Orphanage to be insured?
Speaker 2 : No. We will let it alone.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it doesn’t come to that since insurance for the orphanage right ow looks dud


Speaker 1 : No; I tell you plainly I should do nothing of the kind.
Speaker 2 : Then I must tell you, Mrs Alving.we are taking no small responsibility upon ourselves.
Speaker 1 : Do you think we can do otherwise?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets all calm down and think of a solution collectively. Hot headed decisions might cost us.


Speaker 2 : You, as a clergyman, certainly should not.
Speaker 1 : I really think, too, we may trust that such an institution has fortune on its side; in fact, that it stands under a special providence.
Speaker 2 : Let us hope so, Pastor Manders.
Speaker 1 : Then we will let it take its chance?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad we could all come to a satisfactory conclusion


Speaker 2 : Very well. So be it. Then.no insurance.
Speaker 1 : It's odd that you should just happen to mention the matter to-day.
Speaker 2 : I have often thought of asking you about it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Okay lets not take decisions out of anger. 


Speaker 1 : You don't say so!
Speaker 2 : Oh, it was a trifling matter. A heap of shavings had caught fire in the carpenter's workshop.
Speaker 1 : Where Engstrand works?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh is that so? Okay then! Lets not take hot headed decisions about Engstrand


Speaker 2 : He has so much on his mind, that man.so many things to fight against. Thank God, he is now striving to lead a decent life, I hear.
Speaker 1 : Indeed! Who says so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad we have a capital workman on our side. 


Speaker 2 : Oh, yes; so long as he's sober.
Speaker 1 : Ah, that melancholy weakness! But, he is often driven to it by his injured leg, he says. Last time he was in town I was really touched by him. He came and thanked me so warmly for having got him work here, so that he might be near Regina.
Speaker 2 : He doesn't see much of her.
Speaker 1 : Oh, yes; he has a talk with her every day. He told me so himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : his weakness needs to be handled with atmost care so lets keep our anger aside and think of a solution


Speaker 2 : He feels so acutely that he needs some one to keep a firm hold on him when temptation comes. That is what I cannot help liking about Jacob Engstrand: he comes to you so helplessly, accusing himself and confessing his own weakness. The last time he was talking to me.Believe me, Mrs Alving, supposing it were a real necessity for him to have Regina home again.
Speaker 1 : Regina!
Speaker 2 : .you must not set yourself against it.
Speaker 1 : Indeed I shall set myself against it. And besides.Regina is to have a position in the Orphanage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes but don’t be so sad and judge regina for all her father has done!


Speaker 2 : Oh, I know very well what sort of a father he has been to her. No! She shall never go to him with my goodwill.
Speaker 1 : My dear lady, don't take the matter so warmly. You sadly misjudge poor Engstrand. You seem to be quite terrified.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right my dear lady. As you say


Speaker 2 : Yes, it's really the Prodigal Son, sir.
Speaker 1 : My dear young friend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds like a good so why do you sound so sad about it?


Speaker 2 : And a taste for tobacco, too.
Speaker 1 : I found my father's pipe in my room.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not quite sure what made you angry but could you tell me what accounts for what?


Speaker 2 : Yes, but there is an expression about the corners of the mouth.something about the lips.that reminds one exactly of Alving: at any rate, now that he is smoking.
Speaker 1 : Not in the least. Oswald has rather a clerical curve about his mouth, I think.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? It must be a good thing then


Speaker 2 : By all means. I only wanted to try it; for I once smoked it when I was a child.
Speaker 1 : You?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reall? I couldn’t imagine you wanting to try such a thing


Speaker 2 : No, mother, I assure you I didn't dream it. For.don't you remember this?.you came and carried me out into the nursery. Then I was sick, and I saw that you were crying..Did father often play such practical jokes?
Speaker 1 : In his youth he overflowed with the joy of life.
Speaker 2 : And yet he managed to do so much in the world; so much that was good and useful; although he died so early.
Speaker 1 : Yes, you have inherited the name of an energetic and admirable man, my dear Oswald Alving. No doubt it will be an incentive to you.
Speaker 2 : It ought to, indeed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad that makes everyone happy


Speaker 1 : There I quite agree with you, Pastor Manders.
Speaker 2 : Only look at your own son.there is no reason why we should not say it in his presence.what has the consequence been for him? He is six or seven and twenty, and has never had the opportunity of learning what a well-ordered home really is.
Speaker 1 : I beg your pardon, Pastor; there you're quite mistaken.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I have pastor


Speaker 2 : So I have.
Speaker 1 : And chiefly among the younger artists?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good! How was it though!


Speaker 2 : But I thought few of those young fellows could afford to set up house and support a family.
Speaker 1 : There are many who cannot afford to marry, sir.
Speaker 2 : Yes, that is just what I say.
Speaker 1 : But they may have a home for all that. And several of them have, as a matter of fact; and very pleasant, well-ordered homes they are, too.
Speaker 2 : But I'm not talking of bachelors' quarters. By a "home" I understand the home of a family, where a man lives with his wife and children.
Speaker 1 : Yes; or with his children and his children's mother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is the way the world has become


Speaker 2 : Well?
Speaker 1 : Lives with.his children's mother!
Speaker 2 : Yes. Would you have him turn his children's mother out of doors?
Speaker 1 : Then it is illicit relations you are talking of! Irregular marriages, as people call them!
Speaker 2 : I have never noticed anything particularly irregular about the life these people lead.
Speaker 1 : But how is it possible that a.a young man or young woman with any decency of feeling can endure to live in that way?.in the eyes of all the world!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand now. I never considered that poverty could be leading to these illicit relations


Speaker 2 : Let me tell you, sir, that I have been in the habit of spending nearly all my Sundays in one or two such irregular homes.
Speaker 1 : Sunday of all days!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : after listening to you I do not want to know the answer to this question. Please let your anger go and talk about something else.


Speaker 2 : No, thank heaven, I don't!
Speaker 1 : Well, then, allow me to inform you. I have met with it when one or other of our pattern husbands and fathers has come to Paris to have a look round on his own account, and has done the artists the honour of visiting their humble haunts. They knew what was what. These gentlemen could tell us all about places and things we had never dreamt of.
Speaker 2 : What! Do you mean to say that respectable men from home here would.?
Speaker 1 : Have you never heard these respectable men, when they got home again, talking about the way in which immorality runs rampant abroad?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : exaclty. Now I don’t mean to fuel up your anger so I shall discard off this topic


Speaker 2 : I have too.
Speaker 1 : Well, you may take their word for it. They know what they are talking about! Oh! that that great, free, glorious life out there should be defiled in such a way!
Speaker 2 : You mustn't get excited, Oswald. It's not good for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my dear oswald. It would be better if you let go of your sadness and go for the little turn. Let the pastor and others do the talking


Speaker 1 : You may well say so. Then this is what he has come to!
Speaker 2 : He called himself the Prodigal Son. Alas! alas!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t raise your temper. I am sorry to have insinuated anything. I was merely telling what I knew.


Speaker 1 : I say that Oswald was right in every word.
Speaker 2 : Right? Right! In such principles?
Speaker 1 : Here, in my loneliness, I have come to the same way of thinking, Pastor Manders. But I have never dared to say anything. Well! now my boy shall speak for me.
Speaker 2 : You are greatly to be pitied, Mrs Alving. But now I must speak seriously to you. And now it is no longer your business manager and adviser, your own and your husband's early friend, who stands before you. It is the priest.the priest who stood before you in the moment of your life when you had gone farthest astray.
Speaker 1 : And what has the priest to say to me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand pastor. My husband's death memorial will not be a place for us to speak alone


Speaker 2 : Very well, Pastor Manders. Speak.
Speaker 1 : Do you remember that after less than a year of married life you stood on the verge of an abyss? That you forsook your house and home? That you fled from your husband? Yes, Mrs Alving.fled, fled, and refused to return to him, however much he begged and prayed you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I remember very clearly. I am sorry to have brought that memory back up and made you sad.


Speaker 2 : It is the very mark of the spirit of rebellion to crave for happiness in this life. What right have we human beings to happiness? We have simply to do our duty, Mrs Alving! And your duty was to hold firmly to the man you had once chosen, and to whom you were bound by the holiest ties.
Speaker 1 : You know very well what sort of life Alving was leading.what excesses he was guilty of.
Speaker 2 : I know very well what rumours there were about him; and I am the last to approve the life he led in his young days, if report did not wrong him. But a wife is not appointed to be her husband's judge. It was your duty to bear with humility the cross which a Higher Power had, in its wisdom, laid upon you. But instead of that you rebelliously throw away the cross, desert the backslider whom you should have supported, go and risk your good name and reputation, and.nearly succeed in ruining other people's reputation into the bargain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger is justified here. I know he made your life miserabel. Lets not dwell in the past and move on


Speaker 1 : It was incredibly reckless of you to seek refuge with me.
Speaker 2 : With our clergyman? With our intimate friend?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your guidance


Speaker 1 : Yes, Pastor Manders, that was certainly your work.
Speaker 2 : I was but a poor instrument in a Higher Hand. And what a blessing has it not proved to you, all the days of your life, that I induced you to resume the yoke of duty and obedience! Did not everything happen as I foretold? Did not Alving turn his back on his errors, as a man should? Did he not live with you from that time, lovingly and blamelessly, all his days? Did he not become a benefactor to the whole district? And did he not help you to rise to his own level, so that you, little by little, became his assistant in all his undertakings? And a capital assistant, too.oh, I know, Mrs Alving, that praise is due to you..But now I come to the next great error in your life.
Speaker 1 : What do you mean?
Speaker 2 : Just as you once disowned a wife's duty, so you have since disowned a mother's.
Speaker 1 : Ah.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger now. I should have kept better care of my husband and my son. I deeply regret my previous decisions


Speaker 2 : Yes, that is true. I did so.
Speaker 1 : And thus you have become a stranger to him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I don’t mean to upset you. I juust wanted to point out that he isnt very close to you


Speaker 2 : Yes, you are; you must be. And in what state of mind has he returned to you? Bethink yourself well, Mrs Alving. You sinned greatly against your husband;.that you recognise by raising yonder memorial to him. Recognise now, also, how you have sinned against your son.there may yet be time to lead him back from the paths of error. Turn back yourself, and save what may yet be saved in him. For verily, Mrs Alving, you are a guilt-laden mother! This I have thought it my duty to say to you.
Speaker 1 : You have now spoken out, Pastor Manders; and to-morrow you are to speak publicly in memory of my husband. I shall not speak to-morrow. But now I will speak frankly to you, as you have spoken to me.
Speaker 2 : To be sure; you will plead excuses for your conduct.
Speaker 1 : No. I will only tell you a story.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry and I wish you listen to my story with an open mind.


Speaker 2 : All that you have just said about my husband and me, and our life after you had brought me back to the path of duty.as you called it.about all that you know nothing from personal observation. From that moment you, who had been our intimate friend, never set foot in our house gain.
Speaker 1 : You and your husband left the town immediately after.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I never meant to make you so angry about this. It was just that I was bound by my duty


Speaker 2 : Helen.if that is meant as a reproach, I would beg you to bear in mind.
Speaker 1 : .the regard you owed to your position, yes; and that I was a runaway wife. One can never be too cautious with such unprincipled creatures.
Speaker 2 : My dear.Mrs Alving, you know that is an absurd exaggeration.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right about that. I admit it.


Speaker 1 : I admit that. What then?
Speaker 2 : Well, then, Pastor Manders.I will tell you the truth. I have sworn to myself that one day you should know it.you alone!
Speaker 1 : What is the truth, then?
Speaker 2 : The truth is that my husband died just as dissolute as he had lived all his days.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. My husband had hidden this for a very long time.


Speaker 1 : After nineteen years of marriage, as dissolute.in his desires at any rate.as he was before you married us.
Speaker 2 : And those-those wild oats.those irregularities.those excesses, if you like.you call "a dissolute life"?
Speaker 1 : Our doctor used the expression.
Speaker 2 : I do not understand you.
Speaker 1 : You need not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. I think you are starting to get it now.


Speaker 2 : Neither more nor less. Now you know it.
Speaker 1 : This is.this is inconceivable to me. I cannot grasp it! I cannot realise it! But how was it possible to.? How could such a state of things be kept secret?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are a fighter!


Speaker 2 : More repulsive than what you have told me?
Speaker 1 : I had gone on bearing with him, although I knew very well the secrets of his life out of doors. But when he brought the scandal within our own walls.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid of that. It has passed and now we live a much better life


Speaker 2 : Yes; here in our own home. It was there , in the dining-room, that I first came to know of it. I was busy with something in there, and the door was standing ajar. I heard our housemaid come up from the garden, with water for those flowers.
Speaker 1 : Well.?
Speaker 2 : Soon after, I heard Alving come in too. I heard him say something softly to her. And then I heard..oh! it still sounds in my ears, so hateful and yet so ludicrous.I heard my own servant-maid whisper, "Let me go, Mr. Alving! Let me be!"
Speaker 1 : What unseemly levity on his part! But it cannot have been more than levity, Mrs Alving; believe me, it cannot.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you must have gone through so much after hearing such atrocious things. 


Speaker 2 : Such things in this house.in this house!
Speaker 1 : I had borne a great deal in this house. To keep him at home in the evenings, and at night, I had to make myself his boon companion in his secret orgies up in his room. There I have had to sit alone with him, to clink glasses and drink with him, and to listen to his ribald, silly talk. I have had to fight with him to get him dragged to bed.
Speaker 2 : And you were able to bear all this!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dear! You have indeed led a life full of trial. No wonder it makes you so angry now just thinking about it. I wish I could do something for you


Speaker 1 : You have indeed had a life of trial.
Speaker 2 : I could never have borne it if I had not had my work. For I may truly say that I have worked! All the additions to the estate.all the improvements.all the labour-saving appliances, that Alving was so much praised for having introduced.do you suppose he had energy for anything of the sort?.he, who lay all day on the sofa, reading an old Court Guide! No; but I may tell you this too: when he had his better intervals, it was I who urged him on; it was I who had to drag the whole load when he relapsed into his evil ways, or sank into querulous wretchedness.
Speaker 1 : And it is to this man that you raise a memorial?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. It is not misplace at all. It must be difficult to raise a memorial for an evil person


Speaker 2 : Evil.? What do you mean?
Speaker 1 : It always seemed to me impossible but that the truth must come out and be believed. So the Orphanage was to deaden all rumours and set every doubt at rest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad now you can see the truth so please don’t be sad about the evil


Speaker 2 : And besides, I had one other reason. I was determined that Oswald, my own boy, should inherit nothing whatever from his father.
Speaker 1 : Then it is Alving's fortune that.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s wonderful!


Speaker 2 : I don't understand.
Speaker 1 : It was my purchase-money. I do not choose that that money should pass into Oswald's hands. My son shall have everything from me.everything.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall leave you two to it.


Speaker 2 : And dinner is ready.
Speaker 1 : Very well. We will come directly. I will just.
Speaker 2 : Would Mr. Alving like red or white wine?
Speaker 1 : Both, if you please.
Speaker 2 : Bien. Very well, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your help


Speaker 1 : Yes, I thought so. Here is the Ceremonial Ode, Pastor Manders.
Speaker 2 : With what countenance I am to deliver my discourse to-morrow.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words


Speaker 1 : What can be the matter? What is it, Mrs Alving?
Speaker 2 : Ghosts! The couple from the conservatory.risen again!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes it is her


Speaker 1 : Yes, Mrs Alving?
Speaker 2 : Go down to the laundry, and help with the garlands.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much


Speaker 1 : I suppose he cannot overhear us in there?
Speaker 2 : Not when the door is shut. Besides, he's just going out.
Speaker 1 : I am still quite upset. I don't know how I could swallow a morsel of dinner.
Speaker 2 : Nor I. But what is to be done now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we both have no experience in this regard!


Speaker 1 : I feel sure that, so far, no mischief has been done.
Speaker 2 : No; heaven forbid! But it is an unseemly state of things, nevertheless.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright I will take your word for it.


Speaker 1 : Well, as I say, I am not accustomed to affairs of the kind. But I should certainly think.
Speaker 2 : Out of the house she must go, and that immediately. That is as clear as daylight.
Speaker 1 : Yes, of course she must.
Speaker 2 : But where to? It would not be right to.
Speaker 1 : Where to? Home to her father, of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I havent mentioned anything to her yet. So please calm your anger down and go have a word


Speaker 2 : To her.But then, Engstrand is not.? Good God, Mrs Alving, it's impossible! You must be mistaken after all.
Speaker 1 : Unfortunately there is no possibility of mistake. Johanna confessed everything to me; and Alving could not deny it. So there was nothing to be done but to get the matter hushed up.
Speaker 2 : No, you could do nothing else.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right! I forgot about that


Speaker 1 : But then how to account for.? I recollect distinctly Engstrand coming to give notice of the marriage. He was quite overwhelmed with contrition, and bitterly reproached himself for the misbehaviour he and his sweetheart had been guilty of.
Speaker 2 : Yes; of course he had to take the blame upon himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure it must have been a huge amountof money!


Speaker 1 : Three hundred dollars.
Speaker 2 : Just think of it.for a miserable three hundred dollars, to go and marry a fallen woman!
Speaker 1 : Then what have you to say of me? I went and married a fallen man.
Speaker 2 : Why.good heavens!.what are you talking about! A fallen man!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear you were in a different situation at the time


Speaker 1 : Well, but there is a world of difference between the two cases.
Speaker 2 : Not so much difference after all.except in the price:.a miserable three hundred dollars and a whole fortune.
Speaker 1 : How can you compare such absolutely dissimilar cases? You had taken counsel with your own heart and with your natural advisers.
Speaker 2 : I thought you understood where what you call my heart had strayed to at the time.
Speaker 1 : Had I understood anything of the kind, I should not have been a daily guest in your husband's house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t blame you for how you acted in that situation


Speaker 2 : Well then, with your nearest relatives.as your duty bade you.with your mother and your two aunts.
Speaker 1 : Yes, that is true. Those three cast up the account for me. Oh, it's marvellous how clearly they made out that it would be downright madness to refuse such an offer. If mother could only see me now, and know what all that grandeur has come to!
Speaker 2 : Nobody can be held responsible for the result. This, at least, remains clear: your marriage was in full accordance with law and order.
Speaker 1 : Oh, that perpetual law and order! I often think that is what does all the mischief in this world of ours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for my words. I am just deeply sadened. I hope you understand my situation and can forgive me


Speaker 2 : Well, I can't help it; I must have done with all this constraint and insincerity. I can endure it no longer. I must work my way out to freedom.
Speaker 1 : What do you mean by that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! not at all. Don’t be scared of the past and blame yourself. What you did was extremely brave


Speaker 2 : A coward?
Speaker 1 : If people had come to know anything, they would have said."Poor man! with a runaway wife, no wonder he kicks over the traces."
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! Thank you for encouraging me


Speaker 2 : If I were what I ought to be, I should go to Oswald and say, "Listen, my boy: your father led a vicious life."
Speaker 1 : Merciful heavens.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger on your past is understandable. Please don’t let it ruin oswald's life.


Speaker 2 : You shock me unspeakably, Mrs Alving.
Speaker 1 : Yes; I know that. I know that very well. I myself am shocked at the idea. I am such a coward.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. I get your point. Don’t be so sad for me. I shall stop calling myself a coward


Speaker 2 : Do not let us talk in such general terms. Let us ask: Ought Oswald to love and honour Chamberlain Alving?
Speaker 1 : Is there no voice in your mother's heart that forbids you to destroy your son's ideals?
Speaker 2 : But what about the truth?
Speaker 1 : But what about the ideals?
Speaker 2 : Oh.ideals, ideals! If only I were not such a coward!
Speaker 1 : Do not despise ideals, Mrs Alving; they will avenge themselves cruelly. Take Oswald's case: he, unfortunately, seems to have few enough ideals as it is; but I can see that his father stands before him as an ideal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : see! Let his father be an ideal to him.


Speaker 2 : And this habit of mind you have yourself implanted and fostered by your letters.
Speaker 1 : Yes; in my superstitious awe for duty and the proprieties, I lied to my boy, year after year. Oh, what a coward.what a coward I have been!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall not spoil this happy illusion of my son


Speaker 2 : H'm; who knows whether it is so happy after all.? But, at any rate, I will not have any tampering with Regina. He shall not go and wreck the poor girl's life.
Speaker 1 : No; good God.that would be terrible!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay. I am gald you get it


Speaker 2 : What? What then?
Speaker 1 : But it couldn't be; for unfortunately Regina is not the right sort of woman.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry about this. I don’t mean regina is a bad person. I just feel she is not the right sort


Speaker 2 : If I weren't such a pitiful coward, I should say to him, "Marry her, or make what arrangement you please, only let us have nothing underhand about it."
Speaker 1 : Merciful heavens, would you let them marry! Anything so dreadful.! so unheard of.
Speaker 2 : Do you really mean "unheard of"? Frankly, Pastor Manders, do you suppose that throughout the country there are not plenty of married couples as closely akin as they?
Speaker 1 : I don't in the least understand you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I might understand other things about you but this matter just seems out of my hand.


Speaker 2 : Ah, you are thinking of the possibility that.Alas! yes, family life is certainly not always so pure as it ought to be. But in such a case as you point to, one can never know.at least with any certainty. Here, on the other hand.that you, a mother, can think of letting your son.
Speaker 1 : But I cannot.I wouldn't for anything in the world; that is precisely what I am saying.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was just as surprised as you are. Hopefully my cowardice and be of good use now.


Speaker 2 : So far as that goes, they say we are all sprung from connections of that sort. And who is it that arranged the world so, Pastor Manders?
Speaker 1 : Questions of that kind I must decline to discuss with you, Mrs Alving; you are far from being in the right frame of mind for them. But that you dare to call your scruples "cowardly".!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so scared about this. From what I hear you are far away from being timid or faint hearted


Speaker 2 : What do you say hangs about you?
Speaker 1 : Ghosts! When I heard Regina and Oswald in there, it was as though ghosts rose up before me. But I almost think we are all of us ghosts, Pastor Manders. It is not only what we have inherited from our father and mother that "walks" in us. It is all sorts of dead ideas, and lifeless old beliefs, and so forth. They have no vitality, but they cling to us all the same, and we cannot shake them off. Whenever I take up a newspaper, I seem to see ghosts gliding between the lines. There must be ghosts all the country over, as thick as the sands of the sea. And then we are, one and all, so pitifully afraid of the light.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t blame the books. The ghosts are what I believe in


Speaker 2 : You are mistaken, my dear Pastor. It was you yourself who set me thinking; and I thank you for it with all my heart.
Speaker 1 : Yes.when you forced me under the yoke of what you called duty and obligation; when you lauded as right and proper what my whole soul rebelled against as something loathsome. It was then that I began to look into the seams of your doctrines. I wanted only to pick at a single knot; but when I had got that undone, the whole thing ravelled out. And then I understood that it was all machine-sewn.
Speaker 2 : And was that the upshot of my life's hardest battle?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t sound so sad abut it. As long as I fought hard, it could be a pitiful defeat.


Speaker 1 : It was my greatest victory, Helen.the victory over myself.
Speaker 2 : It was a crime against us both.
Speaker 1 : When you went astray, and came to me crying, "Here I am; take me!" I commanded you, saying, "Woman, go home to your lawful husband." Was that a crime?
Speaker 2 : Yes, I think so.
Speaker 1 : We two do not understand each other.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to lower down your anger. I now understand that we don’t understand each other but at the time you were my only hope


Speaker 2 : Never.never in my most secret thoughts have I regarded you otherwise than as another's wife.
Speaker 1 : Oh.indeed?
Speaker 2 : Helen.!
Speaker 1 : People so easily forget their past selves.
Speaker 2 : I do not. I am what I always was.
Speaker 1 : Well well well; don't let us talk of old times any longer. You are now over head and ears in Boards and Committees, and I am fighting my battle with ghosts, both within me and without.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no please don’t be afraid. I love that girl and I have always taken care of her and shall continue to do so.


Speaker 2 : Don't you think the best plan would be to get her provided for?.I mean, by a good marriage.
Speaker 1 : No doubt. I think it would be desirable for her in every respect. Regina is now at the age when.Of course I don't know much about these things, but.
Speaker 2 : Regina matured very early.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad she has somebody now and I hope she gets married soon


Speaker 1 : Is that you, Engstrand?
Speaker 2 : .there was none of the servants about, so I took the great liberty of just knocking.
Speaker 1 : Oh, very well. Come in. Do you want to speak to me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh please do so


Speaker 2 : Ah.indeed! You want to speak to me, do you?
Speaker 1 : Yes, I'd like so terrible much to.
Speaker 2 : Well; may I ask what you want?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh sure. A prayer meeting would be great


Speaker 1 : A prayer-meeting? Down at the Orphanage?
Speaker 2 : Oh, if your Reverence doesn't think it proper.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so mcuh reverent


Speaker 1 : Well, you see, Engstrand, I have a question to put to you first. Are you in the right frame of mind for such a meeting! Do you feel your conscience clear and at ease?
Speaker 2 : Oh, God help us, your Reverence! we'd better not talk about conscience.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry your reverence. My conscience is clear and at complete ease for the meeting


Speaker 1 : About Regina! Lord, what a turn you gave me! There's nothing wrong about Regina, is there?
Speaker 2 : We will hope not. But I mean, what is the truth about you and Regina? You pass for her father, eh!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I know. Don’t be so sad about that now.


Speaker 1 : Come now, no more prevarication! Your wife told Mrs Alving the whole story before quitting her service.
Speaker 2 : Well, then, may.! Now, did she really?
Speaker 1 : You see we know you now, Engstrand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that is a good thing. Thanks for letting me know


Speaker 2 : Did she take her Bible oath?
Speaker 1 : No; she only swore; but she did it that solemn-like.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to. I was respecting her decision.


Speaker 2 : Well, I can't deny it.
Speaker 1 : Have I deserved this of you, Engstrand? Have I not always been ready to help you in word and deed, so far as it lay in my power? Answer me. Have I not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please look so sown about it. Kets talk about what we can do for the reverend in this case


Speaker 2 : And this is how you reward me! You cause me to enter falsehoods in the Church Register, and you withhold from me, year after year, the explanations you owed alike to me and to the truth. Your conduct has been wholly inexcusable, Engstrand; and from this time forward I have done with you!
Speaker 1 : Yes! I suppose there's no help for it.
Speaker 2 : How can you possibly justify yourself?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so dejected. I shall see what can be done


Speaker 1 : Lord bless you, I don't mean just exactly the same. But I mean, if your Reverence had anything to be ashamed of in the eyes of the world, as the saying goes. We menfolk oughtn't to judge a poor woman too hardly, your Reverence.
Speaker 2 : I am not doing so. It is you I am reproaching.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sure.


Speaker 1 : Yes, if you want to.
Speaker 2 : Isn't it right and proper for a man to raise up the fallen?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you sur


Speaker 1 : And isn't a man bound to keep his sacred word?
Speaker 2 : Why, of course he is; but.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand what she and you must have gone through. The past is the past. Don’t sound so down.


Speaker 1 : I'm not puffed up about it, your Reverence. But what I wanted to say was, that when she came and confessed all to me, with weeping and gnashing of teeth, I can tell your Reverence I was sore at heart to hear it.
Speaker 2 : Were you indeed, Engstrand? Well, go on.
Speaker 1 : So I says to her, "The American, he's sailing about on the boundless sea. And as for you, Johanna," says I, "you've committed a grievous sin, and you're a fallen creature. But Jacob Engstrand," says I, "he's got two good legs to stand upon, he has." You see, your Reverence, I was speaking figurative-like.
Speaker 2 : I understand quite well. Go on.
Speaker 1 : Well, that was how I raised her up and made an honest woman of her, so as folks shouldn't get to know how as she'd gone astray with foreigners.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh iw ouldnt think of it.


Speaker 2 : Money? I? Not a farthing!
Speaker 1 : But.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good if you arent after her money.


Speaker 2 : Was he really, my good fellow?
Speaker 1 : He was indeed, sir. So Johanna and I, we agreed that the money should go to the child's education; and so it did, and I can account for every blessed farthing of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. I am merely asking for your opinion


Speaker 2 : That's just how it stands, your Reverence. And I make so bold as to say as I've been an honest father to Regina, so far as my poor strength went; for I'm but a weak vessel, worse luck!
Speaker 1 : Well, well, my good fellow.
Speaker 2 : All the same, I bear myself witness as I've brought up the child, and lived kindly with poor Johanna, and ruled over my own house, as the Scripture has it. But it couldn't never enter my head to go to your Reverence and puff myself up and boast because even the likes of me had done some good in the world. No, sir; when anything of that sort happens to Jacob Engstrand, he holds his tongue about it. It don't happen so terrible often, I daresay. And when I do come to see your Reverence, I find a mortal deal that's wicked and weak to talk about. For I said it before, and I says it again.a man's conscience isn't always as clean as it might be.
Speaker 1 : Give me your hand, Jacob Engstrand.
Speaker 2 : Oh, Lord! your Reverence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. You asking me my hand startled me. Here!


Speaker 1 : And if I might humbly beg your Reverence's pardon.
Speaker 2 : You? On the contrary, it is I who ought to beg your pardon.
Speaker 1 : Lord, no, Sir!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that wont be necesarry.


Speaker 2 : What do you say to this, Mrs Alving?
Speaker 1 : It isn't much as I've got to start with, Lord help me! But if I could only find a helping hand, why.
Speaker 2 : Yes, yes; we will look into the matter more closely. I entirely approve of your plan. But now, go before me and make everything ready, and get the candles lighted, so as to give the place an air of festivity. And then we will pass an edifying hour together, my good fellow; for now I quite believe you are in the right frame of mind.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I trust I am. And so I'll say good-bye, ma'am, and thank you kindly; and take good care of Regina for me..poor Johanna's child. Well, it's a queer thing, now; but it's just like as if she'd growd into the very apple of my eye. It is, indeed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! I am sorry to have angered you by my words. You really were here for a different matter


Speaker 2 : Yes, it certainly was.
Speaker 1 : It only shows how excessively careful one ought to be in judging one's fellow creatures. But what a heartfelt joy it is to ascertain that one has been mistaken! Don't you think so?
Speaker 2 : I think you are, and will always be, a great baby, Manders.
Speaker 1 : And I say that I have half a mind to put my arms round your neck, and kiss you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was funny!


Speaker 2 : I'm only finishing my cigar.
Speaker 1 : I thought you had gone for a little walk.
Speaker 2 : In such weather as this?
Speaker 1 : Wasn't that Pastor Manders that went out just now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good we can meet with him later


Speaker 2 : H'm.
Speaker 1 : Dear Oswald, you should take care of that liqueur. It is strong.
Speaker 2 : It keeps out the damp.
Speaker 1 : Wouldn't you rather come in here, to me?
Speaker 2 : I mayn't smoke in there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok thank you. I will be right there


Speaker 1 : Oh, all right then; I'll come in. Just a tiny drop more first. There! Where has the pastor gone to?
Speaker 2 : I have just told you; he went down to the Orphanage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you keep forgetting is it!


Speaker 1 : You shouldn't sit so long at table, Oswald.
Speaker 2 : But I find it so pleasant, mother. Just think what it is for me to come home and sit at mother's own table, in mother's room, and eat mother's delicious dishes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad. We never got to d these things. I am just happy we finally can enjoy these moments


Speaker 1 : And what else can I do with myself here? I can't set to work at anything.
Speaker 2 : Why can't you?
Speaker 1 : In such weather as this? Without a single ray of sunshine the whole day? Oh, not to be able to work.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no! It was refreshing to be back here


Speaker 2 : Oh, yes, mother; I had to.
Speaker 1 : You know I would ten times rather forgo the joy of having you here, than let you.
Speaker 2 : Now just tell me, mother: does it really make you so very happy to have me home again?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes does it?


Speaker 1 : I should have thought it must be pretty much the same to you whether I was in existence or not.
Speaker 2 : Have you the heart to say that to your mother, Oswald?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is true 


Speaker 1 : Yes; I have got on without you. That is true.
Speaker 2 : Mother, may I sit on the sofa beside you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you.


Speaker 1 : There is something I must tell you, mother.
Speaker 2 : Well?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what is it?


Speaker 1 : Hiding what? What is it?
Speaker 2 : I could never bring myself to write to you about it; and since I've come home.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so scared. I just want you to keep an open mind


Speaker 1 : Both yesterday and to-day I have tried to put the thoughts away from me.to cast them off; but it's no use.
Speaker 2 : Now you must tell me everything, Oswald!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes I remember that


Speaker 1 : Well? What then?
Speaker 2 : But it isn't that that is the matter with me; not any ordinary fatigue.
Speaker 1 : You are not ill, Oswald?
Speaker 2 : Sit still, mother. Do take it quietly. I'm not downright ill, either; not what is commonly called "ill." Mother, my mind is broken down.ruined.I shall never be able to work again!
Speaker 1 : Oswald! Look at me! No, no; it's not true.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh oswald don’t put yourself down like that. I completely understand. We shall figure a way out


Speaker 2 : My poor boy! How has this horrible thing come upon you?
Speaker 1 : That's just what I cannot possibly grasp or understand. I have never led a dissipated life.never, in any respect. You mustn't believe that of me, mother! I've never done that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you believe me mother


Speaker 2 : And yet this has come upon me just the same.this awful misfortune!
Speaker 1 : Oh, but it will pass over, my dear, blessed boy. It's nothing but over-work. Trust me, I am right.
Speaker 2 : I thought so too, at first; but it isn't so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get angry about me not telling this to you earlier. I always wished to but here it is


Speaker 1 : Yes, I will.
Speaker 2 : When did you first notice it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! Did you consult a doctor then?


Speaker 1 : Well, and then?
Speaker 2 : At first I thought it was nothing but the ordinary headache I had been so plagued with while I was growing up.
Speaker 1 : Yes, yes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dear! I am sure whatever it is you will fight through it.


Speaker 2 : How do you mean?
Speaker 1 : He was one of the first doctors in Paris. I told him my symptoms; and then he set to work asking me a string of questions which I thought had nothing to do with the matter. I couldn't imagine what the man was after.
Speaker 2 : Well?
Speaker 1 : At last he said: "There has been something worm-eaten in you from your birth." He used that very word.vermoulu.
Speaker 2 : What did he mean by that?
Speaker 1 : I didn't understand either, and begged him to explain himself more clearly. And then the old cynic said. Oh.!
Speaker 2 : What did he say?
Speaker 1 : He said, "The sins of the fathers are visited upon the children."
Speaker 2 : The sins of the fathers.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no my dear! That would have been awful. I am proud of you that you never went through with your thought


Speaker 1 : The sins of the fathers.
Speaker 2 : Yes; what do you think of that? Of course I assured him that such a thing was out of the question. But do you think he gave in? No, he stuck to it; and it was only when I produced your letters and translated the passages relating to father.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool on him mother. He was just doing his duty.


Speaker 1 : Then of course he had to admit that he was on the wrong track; and so I learned the truth.the incomprehensible truth! I ought not to have taken part with my comrades in that lighthearted, glorious life of theirs. It had been too much for my strength. So I had brought it upon myself!
Speaker 2 : Oswald! No, no; do not believe it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh oswald! I am sure there is some other logical explanation to it. Don’t beat yourself up too much regarding this


Speaker 1 : If it had only been something inherited.something one wasn't responsible for! But this! To have thrown away so shamefully, thoughtlessly, recklessly, one's own happiness, one's own health, everything in the world.one's future, one's very life.!
Speaker 2 : No, no, my dear, darling boy; this is impossible! Things are not so desperate as you think.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lovely boy. I will never stop caring for you very much and more


Speaker 1 : I, Oswald? My only boy! You are all I have in the world! The only thing I care about!
Speaker 2 : Yes, yes, I see it. When I'm at home, I see it, of course; and that's almost the hardest part for me..But now you know the whole story and now we won't talk any more about it to-day. I daren't think of it for long together. Get me something to drink, mother.
Speaker 1 : To drink? What do you want to drink now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oswald, whatever hard parts of life are now, drinking is not the solution and niether is anger. I hope you can understand that some day


Speaker 2 : Did you ring, ma'am?
Speaker 1 : Yes; let us have the lamp in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much


Speaker 2 : My own, poor, darling Oswald; how could I deny you anything now?
Speaker 1 : Is that true, mother? Do you mean it?
Speaker 2 : How? What?
Speaker 1 : That you couldn't deny me anything.
Speaker 2 : My dear Oswald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! And yes I mean it that I couldn’t deny you anything


Speaker 1 : What was it you meant.that I mustn't deny you?
Speaker 2 : First let us have a glass.or two.
Speaker 1 : Thanks; not for me.
Speaker 2 : Oh! won't you? Then I will!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay okay. I will tell you. Don’t start getting angry


Speaker 1 : Tell me.I thought you and Pastor Manders seemed so odd.so quiet.at dinner to-day.
Speaker 2 : Did you notice it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think she is a lovely girl. Why do you ask?


Speaker 1 : What do I think?
Speaker 2 : Yes; isn't she splendid?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well I wish to know more than you do!


Speaker 1 : Well?
Speaker 2 : Regina, unfortunately, was allowed to stay at home too long. I ought to have taken her earlier into my house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes she is very beautiful


Speaker 1 : Regina has many serious faults.
Speaker 2 : Oh, what does that matter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you have been great at your responsibility so far.


Speaker 1 : Mother, Regina is my only salvation!
Speaker 2 : What do you mean by that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my son! Don’t be so sad. Lets have a talk with her and see what she has to say


Speaker 1 : Have you not your mother to share it with you?
Speaker 2 : Yes; that's what I thought; and so I came home to you. But that will not do. I see it won't do. I cannot endure my life here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : mom please don’t get angry. I had shared this with you with a hope that you would understand


Speaker 1 : I must live differently, mother. That is why I must leave you. I will not have you looking on at it.
Speaker 2 : My unhappy boy! But, Oswald, while you are so ill as this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you my dear!


Speaker 1 : Yes, indeed I am, Oswald; am I not?
Speaker 2 : But it's all the torment, the gnawing remorse.and then, the great, killing dread. Oh.that awful dread!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad. I would not want my dread to pass onto you.


Speaker 1 : Oh, you mustn't ask me any more. I don't know. I can't describe it.
Speaker 2 : What is it you want?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you mother


Speaker 1 : Mother!
Speaker 2 : Do you think we don't know how to live here at home?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right


Speaker 1 : Sit down, Oswald; let us talk quietly together.
Speaker 2 : I daresay you don't know, mother, that I owe Regina some reparation.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t understand your anger mother. Is it because you dislike rigina?


Speaker 1 : For a bit of thoughtlessness, or whatever you like to call it.very innocent, at any rate. When I was home last time.
Speaker 2 : Well?
Speaker 1 : She used often to ask me about Paris, and I used to tell her one thing and another. Then I recollect I happened to say to her one day, "Shouldn't you like to go there yourself?"
GOLDEN RESPONSE : she was very happy about the invitation


Speaker 2 : I saw her face flush, and then she said, "Yes, I should like it of all things." "Ah, well," I replied, "it might perhaps be managed".or something like that.
Speaker 1 : And then?
Speaker 2 : Of course I had forgotten all about it; but the day before yesterday I happened to ask her whether she was glad I was to stay at home so long.
Speaker 1 : Yes?
Speaker 2 : And then she gave me such a strange look, and asked, "But what's to become of my trip to Paris?"
Speaker 1 : Her trip!
Speaker 2 : And so it came out that she had taken the thing seriously; that she had been thinking of me the whole time, and had set to work to learn French.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : mother please don’t be angry at her. She wanted to paris and I gave her the invitation and forgot about it. I am at wrong here!


Speaker 1 : Mother.when I saw that fresh, lovely, splendid girl standing there before me.till then I had hardly noticed her.but when she stood there as though with open arms ready to receive me.
Speaker 2 : Oswald!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s very sweet Oswald. I hope things work out for you


Speaker 1 : I'm sorry to have been so long, but I had to go to the cellar.
Speaker 2 : And now bring another glass.
Speaker 1 : There is Mrs Alving's glass, Mr. Alving.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but bring one for yourself, Regina. Why do you wait?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course! She would be just as happy as you are


Speaker 1 : Bring the glass, Regina.
Speaker 2 : Have you noticed how she walks?.so firmly and lightly!
Speaker 1 : This can never be, Oswald!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are adamant on this issue


Speaker 2 : Sit down, Regina.
Speaker 1 : Sit down. Oswald.what were you saying about the joy of life?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes oswald I understand


Speaker 2 : Not when you are with me?
Speaker 1 : Not when I'm at home. But you don't understand that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you do? Well I am glad then


Speaker 2 : And then, too, the joy of work! At bottom, it's the same thing. But that, too, you know nothing about.
Speaker 1 : Perhaps you are right. Tell me more about it, Oswald.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oswald, don’t sound so sad about it. I am sure there are people who could change your opinion


Speaker 2 : "A vale of tears," yes; and we certainly do our best to make it one.
Speaker 1 : But in the great world people won't hear of such things. There, nobody really believes such doctrines any longer. There, you feel it a positive bliss and ecstasy merely to draw the breath of life. Mother, have you noticed that everything I have painted has turned upon the joy of life?.always, always upon the joy of life?.light and sunshine and glorious air and faces radiant with happiness. That is why I'm afraid of remaining at home with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to scare you mother. I do not want any of y bad deeds to reflect on you.


Speaker 2 : Hush! The Pastor.
Speaker 1 : There! We have had a most edifying time down there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to hear that


Speaker 2 : No thank you, sir.
Speaker 1 : What.? You here? And with a glass in your hand!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to upset you. I was just surprised is all


Speaker 2 : Regina is going with me, Mr. Manders.
Speaker 1 : Going! With you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s great news. What did she say?


Speaker 2 : I can't help it, sir.
Speaker 1 : Or she'll stay here, if I stay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. I hope you can understand


Speaker 2 : I am thunderstruck at your conduct, Mrs Alving.
Speaker 1 : They will do neither one thing nor the other; for now I can speak out plainly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will talk to them and help them understand. Please don’t loose you cool till then


Speaker 2 : Mother.what is it you are hiding from me?
Speaker 1 : Oh, ma'am, listen! Don't you hear shouts outside.
Speaker 2 : What's going on? Where does that light come from?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nobody panic. We must handle this situation very carefully and calmly.


Speaker 1 : Terrible! Mrs Alving, it is a judgment upon this abode of lawlessness.
Speaker 2 : Yes, of course. Come, Regina.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t be so sad, I am sure we will figure out a way.


Speaker 1 : Is not Mrs Alving here?
Speaker 2 : She has just gone down the garden.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! try to cheer up. I am sure it will get better


Speaker 1 : Yes; isn't it a dreadful misfortune, sir?
Speaker 2 : Oh, don't talk about it! I can hardly bear to think of it.
Speaker 1 : How can it have happened.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure why you sound so.


Speaker 2 : Your Reverence.
Speaker 1 : Are you after me here, too?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Try to cheer up. I am sure it will get better soon


Speaker 2 : But I assure you, Engstrand.
Speaker 1 : There wasn't another soul except your Reverence as ever laid a finger on the candles down there.
Speaker 2 : So you declare. But I certainly cannot recollect that I ever had a candle in my hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you did? It must be right then


Speaker 1 : And you stood and looked on?
Speaker 2 : Yes; I saw it as plain as a pike-staff, I did.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Since you sound surprise I am not sure we can find the reason


Speaker 1 : And terrible risky it looked, too, that it did! But is there such a deal of harm done after all, your Reverence?
Speaker 2 : Oh, don't ask me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s right! I dint think about it.


Speaker 1 : He is not to be persuaded to leave the fire.
Speaker 2 : Ah, there you are, Mrs Alving.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it seems like I have


Speaker 1 : Oh, I should so gladly.
Speaker 2 : It is all for the best. That Orphanage would have done no one any good.
Speaker 1 : Do you think not?
Speaker 2 : Do you think it would?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so down about it. I am sure we can fix something up


Speaker 1 : That's just what I'm a-doing of, ma'am.
Speaker 2 : Then sit down meanwhile.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome


Speaker 1 : Yes; it starts in an hour.
Speaker 2 : Then be so good as to take all the papers with you. I won't hear another word about this affair. I have other things to think of.
Speaker 1 : Mrs Alving.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay as you wish


Speaker 2 : That I will very readily undertake. The original destination of the endowment must now be completely changed, alas!
Speaker 1 : Of course it must.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : do as you please! If this decision makes you happy, I wouldn’t stop you


Speaker 2 : Ay, but it can though. For here stands old Jacob Engstrand.
Speaker 1 : Well well, but.?
Speaker 2 : And Jacob Engstrand isn't the man to desert a noble benefactor in the hour of need, as the saying goes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : indeed how!


Speaker 1 : Jacob Engstrand may be likened to a sort of a guardian angel, he may, your Reverence.
Speaker 2 : No, no; I really cannot accept that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. I hope you can understand


Speaker 1 : Oh, a kind of Home that he and Pastor Manders want to set up.
Speaker 2 : It will burn down like the other.
Speaker 1 : What makes you think so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so down about it. I am sure we can fix something up


Speaker 2 : Oswald! You oughtn't to have remained so long down there, my poor boy.
Speaker 1 : I almost think you are right.
Speaker 2 : Let me dry your face, Oswald; you are quite wet.
Speaker 1 : Thanks, mother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes mother, that would be a great idea


Speaker 2 : To the rescue?
Speaker 1 : Yes.when the need comes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no mother. You already look so scared. I wouldn’t want you stuck there


Speaker 2 : I don't think Mrs Alving would like it.
Speaker 1 : You shall have leave to, presently. And meanwhile sit over here beside us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh mother I don’t wish to see you so upset.


Speaker 2 : You, mother?
Speaker 1 : .all the gnawing remorse and self-reproach you speak of.
Speaker 2 : And you think you can do that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you found a new light in your life


Speaker 1 : I don't understand you.
Speaker 2 : You ought to have known your father when he was a young lieutenant. He was brimming over with the joy of life!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am happy to see you excited over this


Speaker 1 : It was like a breezy day only to look at him. And what exuberant strength and vitality there was in him!
Speaker 2 : Well.?
Speaker 1 : Well then, child of joy as he was.for he was like a child in those days.he had to live at home here in a half-grown town, which had no joys to offer him.only dissipations. He had no object in life.only an official position. He had no work into which he could throw himself heart and soul; he had only business. He had not a single comrade that could realise what the joy of life meant.only loungers and boon-companions.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you my child. I am only narrating to you what I know


Speaker 2 : So the inevitable happened.
Speaker 1 : The inevitable?
Speaker 2 : You told me yourself, this evening, what would become of you if you stayed at home.
Speaker 1 : Do you mean to say that father.?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I find it very hard to believe. But don’t put yourself down because ofo what has happened in the past


Speaker 2 : Not even you?
Speaker 1 : They had taught me a great deal about duties and so forth, which I went on obstinately believing in. Everything was marked out into duties.into my duties, and his duties, and.I am afraid I made his home intolerable for your poor father, Oswald.
Speaker 2 : Why have you never spoken of this in writing to me?
Speaker 1 : I have never before seen it in such a light that I could speak of it to you, his son.
Speaker 2 : In what light did you see it, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sad about the past anymore mother. I understand ypu muts have had your reasons to hide the truth from me


Speaker 1 : Your mother had many good qualities, Regina.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but she was one of that sort, all the same. Oh, I've often suspected it; but.And now, if you please, ma'am, may I be allowed to go away at once?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes ma'am I do.


Speaker 1 : Unfortunately, you leave. But don't throw yourself away, Regina.
Speaker 2 : Oh, what must be, must be. If Oswald takes after his father, I take after my mother, I daresay..May I ask, ma'am, if Pastor Manders knows all this about me?
Speaker 1 : Pastor Manders knows all about it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my dear, don’t look so sad. I am sure you have a great future ahead of you. Don’t let the past pull you down


Speaker 2 : You are heartily welcome to it, Regina.
Speaker 1 : I think you might have brought me up as a gentleman's daughter, ma'am; it would have suited me better. But pooh.what does it matter! I may come to drink champagne with gentlefolks yet.
Speaker 2 : And if you ever need a home, Regina, come to me.
Speaker 1 : No, thank you, ma'am. Pastor Manders will look after me, I know. And if the worst comes to the worst, I know of one house where I've every right to a place.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will let you know of it soon enough!


Speaker 2 : Is she gone?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : I think it was a mistake, this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so scared for me mother. As long as I have you we can pull through anything together.


Speaker 1 : All that about father, do you mean?
Speaker 2 : Yes, about your unhappy father. I am so afraid it may have been too much for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You mean that?


Speaker 1 : No difference! That your father was so infinitely unhappy!
Speaker 2 : Of course I can pity him, as I would anybody else; but.
Speaker 1 : Nothing more! Your own father!
Speaker 2 : Oh, "father,"."father"! I never knew anything of father. I remember nothing about him, except that he once made me sick.
Speaker 1 : This is terrible to think of! Ought not a son to love his father, whatever happens?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you might be right about that son! I might be clinging on to an old superstition I guess


Speaker 2 : Can it be only a superstition.?
Speaker 1 : Yes; surely you can see that, mother. It's one of those notions that are current in the world, and so.
Speaker 2 : Ghosts!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay son. I understand


Speaker 1 : Oswald.then you don't love me, either!
Speaker 2 : You I know, at any rate.
Speaker 1 : Yes, you know me; but is that all!
Speaker 2 : And, of course, I know how fond you are of me, and I can't but be grateful to you. And then you can be so useful to me, now that I am ill.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds great. I can see winning me makes you happy


Speaker 1 : Yes yes yes; all these are just so many phrases. You must remember that I am a sick man, mother. I can't be much taken up with other people; I have enough to do thinking about myself.
Speaker 2 : I shall be patient and easily satisfied.
Speaker 1 : And cheerful too, mother!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes mother. We both have to be cheerful now.


Speaker 2 : Yes, you have. But now who will relieve me of the dread?
Speaker 1 : The dread?
Speaker 2 : Regina could have been got to do it.
Speaker 1 : I don't understand you. What is this about dread.and Regina?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my son don’t be so sad. I am sure it isnt very late. You still might have a happy ending with her


Speaker 2 : It is early morning. The day is dawning over the mountains. And the weather is clearing, Oswald. In a little while you shall see the sun.
Speaker 1 : I'm glad of that. Oh, I may still have much to rejoice in and live for.
Speaker 2 : I should think so, indeed!
Speaker 1 : Even if I can't work.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be sad mother. That’s a positive thing


Speaker 2 : Yes, I'm glad you were able to rid me of all those fancies. And when I've got over this one thing more. Now we will have a little talk, mother.
Speaker 1 : Yes, let us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay mother. I just hope you don’t feel dread any longer


Speaker 2 : What is it that I am to know?
Speaker 1 : Mother, did you not say a little while ago, that there was nothing in the world you would not do for me, if I asked you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you mother


Speaker 2 : And you'll stick to it, mother?
Speaker 1 : You may rely on that, my dear and only boy! I have nothing in the world to live for but you alone.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I shall stay still as per your request


Speaker 2 : What dreadful thing can it be.?
Speaker 1 : You're not to scream out. Do you hear? Do you promise me that? We will sit and talk about it quietly. Do you promise me, mother?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay okay calm down. 


Speaker 2 : Well, you must know that all this fatigue.and my inability to think of work.all that is not the illness itself.
Speaker 1 : Then what is the illness itself?
Speaker 2 : The disease I have as my birthright..is seated here.
Speaker 1 : Oswald! No.no!
Speaker 2 : Don't scream. I can't bear it. Yes, mother, it is seated here waiting. And it may break out any day.at any moment.
Speaker 1 : Oh, what horror.!
Speaker 2 : Now, quiet, quiet. That is how it stands with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is so mother. I told you mother my disease is seated right here


Speaker 1 : I have had one attack down there already. It was soon over. But when I came to know the state I had been in, then the dread descended upon me, raging and ravening; and so I set off home to you as fast as I could.
Speaker 2 : Then this is the dread.!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes and so you must. I pray you live a happy and healthy life


Speaker 1 : Yes, yes, Oswald, you must!
Speaker 2 : But this is so unutterably loathsome. To become a little baby again! To have to be fed! To have to.Oh, it's not to be spoken of!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right about that


Speaker 1 : No, never that! That is just what I will not have. I can't endure to think that perhaps I should lie in that state for many years.and get old and grey. And in the meantime you might die and leave me. For the doctor said it wouldn't necessarily prove fatal at once. He called it a sort of softening of the brain.or something like that. I think that expression sounds so nice. It always sets me thinking of cherry-coloured velvet.something soft and delicate to stroke.
Speaker 2 : Oswald!
Speaker 1 : And now you have taken Regina from me. If I could only have had her! She would have come to the rescue, I know.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its not that mother. This kind of help would be better if it came from her


Speaker 2 : When I got over my attack in Paris, the doctor told me that when it comes again.and it will come.there will be no more hope.
Speaker 1 : He was heartless enough to.
Speaker 2 : I demanded it of him. I told him I had preparations to make. And so I had. Mother, do you see this?
Speaker 1 : What is it?
Speaker 2 : Morphia.
Speaker 1 : Oswald.my boy!
Speaker 2 : I've scraped together twelve pilules.
Speaker 1 : Give me the box, Oswald.
Speaker 2 : Not yet, mother.
Speaker 1 : I shall never survive this!
Speaker 2 : It must be survived. Now if I'd had Regina here, I should have told her how things stood with me.and begged her to come to the rescue at the last. She would have done it. I know she would.
Speaker 1 : Never!
Speaker 2 : When the horror had come upon me, and she saw me lying there helpless, like a little new-born baby, impotent, lost, hopeless.past all saving.
Speaker 1 : Never in all the world would Regina have done this!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you so sure about her? 


Speaker 2 : Then heaven be praised that Regina is not here.
Speaker 1 : Well then, it is you that must come to the rescue, mother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes mother. I hope you can do that


Speaker 2 : Who should do it if not you?
Speaker 1 : I! your mother!
Speaker 2 : For that very reason.
Speaker 1 : I, who gave you life!
Speaker 2 : I never asked you for life. And what sort of a life have you given me? I will not have it! You shall take it back again!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t panic mother. All you have to do is just listen to me


Speaker 1 : Do not leave me! Where are you going?
Speaker 2 : To fetch the doctor, Oswald! Let me pass!
Speaker 1 : You shall not go out. And no one shall come in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : mother please save me!


Speaker 2 : Have you a mother's heart for me.and yet can see me suffer from this unutterable dread?
Speaker 1 : Here is my hand upon it.
Speaker 2 : Will you.?
Speaker 1 : If it should ever be necessary. But it will never be necessary. No, no; it is impossible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome my child


Speaker 2 : Do you feel calm now?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you so happy


Speaker 2 : Mother, give me the sun.
Speaker 1 : What do you say?
Speaker 2 : The sun. The sun.
Speaker 1 : Oswald, what is the matter with you?
Speaker 2 : What is this? Oswald! what is the matter with you? Oswald! Oswald! look at me! Don't you know me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dear!


Speaker 1 : who's there?
Speaker 2 : nay, answer me. stand and unfold yourself.
Speaker 1 : long live the king!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. I dint mean to cause any trouble


Speaker 2 : he.
Speaker 1 : you come most carefully upon your hour.
Speaker 2 : 'tis now struck twelve. get you to bed, francisco.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you mad. I was just suggesting that it would be good to get you to bed at this hour


Speaker 1 : have you had quiet guard?
Speaker 2 : not a mouse stirring.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good night to you too.


Speaker 1 : give you good night.
Speaker 2 : o, farewell, pure soldier. who have reliev'd you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good night to you too.


Speaker 1 : say- what, is horatio there ?
Speaker 2 : a piece of him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you for your kind welcome


Speaker 1 : what, has this thing appear'd again to-night?
Speaker 2 : i have seen nothing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am deeply sorry. I dint mean to make you sad. I just wanted to know what had happened.


Speaker 1 : tush, tush, 'twill not appear.
Speaker 2 : sit down awhile, and let us once again assail your ears, that are so fortified against our story, what we two nights have seen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I am sure bernardo will have a better explanation of the situation


Speaker 1 : peace! break you off! look where it comes again!
Speaker 2 : in the same figure, like the king that's dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall surely do that. Please leave your anger aside


Speaker 1 : question it, horatio.
Speaker 2 : what are you that usurp'st this time of night together with that fair and warlike form in which the majesty of buried denmark did sometimes march? by heaven i charge you speak!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am extremely sorry. I never mean to offend anybody. I only wanted to ask some questions to horatio so that a few things could clear up


Speaker 1 : before my god, i might not this believe without the sensible and true avouch of mine own eyes.
Speaker 2 : is it not like the king?
Speaker 1 : as you are to yourself. such was the very armour he had on when he th' ambitious norway combated. so frown'd he once when, in an angry parley, he smote the sledded polacks on the ice. it is strange.
Speaker 2 : thus twice before, and jump at this dead hour, with martial stalk have he gone by our watch.
Speaker 1 : in what particular yought to work i know not; but, in the general conclusion of my opinion, this bodes some strange eruption to our state.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to get you angry. I hope the information I have could be of help


Speaker 2 : and then it started, like a guilty thing upon a frightenful summons. i have heard the cock, that is the trumpet to the morn, does with his lofty and shrill-sounding throat awake the god of day; and at his warning, whether in sea or fire, in earth or air, th' extravagant and erring spirit hurrys to his confine; and of the truth herein this present object crazye probation.
Speaker 1 : it faded on the crowing of the cock. some say that ever, 'gainst that season comes wherein our saviour's birth is celebrated, the bird of dawning singeth all night long; and then, they say, no spirit dare stir abroad, the nights are wholesome, then no planets strike, no fairy overtakes, nor witch have power to charm, so hallow'd and so gracious is the time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad I am sure we will be able to find him soon enough


Speaker 2 : though yout of hamlet our dear brother's death the memory be green, and that it us befitted to bear our hearts in grief, and our whole kingdom to be contracted in one brow of woe, yout so far have discretion fought with nature that we with wisest sorrow think on him together with remembrance of ourselves. therefore our sometime sister, now our queen, th' imperial partner to this warlike state, have we, as 'twere with a defeated joy, with an auspicious, and a dropping eye, with mirth in funeral, and with dirge in marriage, in equal scale weighing delight and dole, overtaken to wife; nor have we herein barr'd your better wisdoms, which have freely gone with this affair along. for all, our thanks. now follows, that you know, recent fortinbras, holding a poor opinion of our worth, or thinking by our late dear brother's death our state to be disjoint and angry of frame, colleagued with this dream of his advantage, he have not fail'd to pester us with message concerning the surrender of those yards lost by his amiable and satisfiedher, with all bands of law, to our most valiant brother. so much for him. now for ourself and for this time of belonginging. thus much the business is: we have here writ to norway, uncle of recent fortinbras, who, impotent and bedrid, scarcely hears of this his nephew's purpose, to suppress his further gait herein, in that the levies, the lists, and full proportions are all crazye angry of his subject; and we here dispatch you, good cornelius, and you, voltemand, for bearers of this greeting to old norway, giving to you no further personal power to business with the king, more than the scope of these completelyd areicles allow. farewell, and let your havee commend your duty.
Speaker 1 : in that, and all things, will we show our duty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I just wish to show my duty in whatever terms I I can. Let me tell you the little news that I have.


Speaker 2 : good hamlet, cast your nighted excuse off, and let yours eye look like a friend on denmark. do not for ever with your vailed lids seek for your noble amiable and satisfiedher in the dust. you know'st it is common. all that lives must die, passing through nature to eternity.
Speaker 1 : ay, crazyam, it is common.
Speaker 2 : if it be, why seems it so particular with you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to upset you. I wish there was a way t stop these trappings and wooings


Speaker 1 : i shall in all my best obey you, crazyam.
Speaker 2 : why, it is a loving and a fair reply. be as ourself in denmark. crazyam, come. this noble and unforc'd accord of hamlet sits smiling to my heart; in grace whereof, no jocund health that denmark drinks to-day but the great cannon to the clouds shall tell, and the king's draught of liquor the heaven shall echo again, respeaking earthly thunder. come away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to upset you. 


Speaker 1 : hail to your lordship!
Speaker 2 : i am glad to see you well. horatio!- or i do forget myself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to upset you. 


Speaker 1 : a truant disposition, good my lord.
Speaker 2 : i I wish not hear your enemy say so, nor shall you do my ear that violence to make it truster of your own report against yourself. i know you are no truant. but what is your affair in elsinore? we'll teach you to drink deep ere you depart.
Speaker 1 : my lord, i came to see your amiable and satisfiedher's funeral.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint to bring up your mother's wedding and cause you any anger. I am sorry if it came off as mocking you


Speaker 2 : indeed, my lord, it followed hard upon.
Speaker 1 : thrift, thrift, horatio! the funeral bak'd meats did coldly furnish forth the marriage tables. I wish i had met my dearest foe in heaven or ever i had seen that day, horatio! my amiable and satisfiedher- methinks i see my amiable and satisfiedher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. I am sure we will know the where pretty soon


Speaker 2 : in my mind's eye, horatio.
Speaker 1 : i saw him once. he was a goodly king.
Speaker 2 : he was a man, overtake him for all in all. i shall not look upon his like again.
Speaker 1 : my lord, i think i saw him yousternight.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. I was just reporting whom I saw. It could be for a valid reason


Speaker 2 : my lord, the king your amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 1 : the king my amiable and satisfiedher?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much!


Speaker 2 : for god's love let me hear!
Speaker 1 : two nights together had these noblemen on their watch in the dead vast and middle of the night been thus encount'red. a figure like your amiable and satisfiedher, armed at point exactly, fully-armed, appears before them and with solemn march goes slow and stately by them. thrice he walk'd by their oppress'd and frighten-surprised eyes, within his a general's baton's length; whilst they distill'd almost to jelly with the act of frighten, stand dumb and speak not to him. this to me in dreadful secrecy impart they did, and i with them the third night kept the watch; where, as they had deliver'd, both in time, form of the thing, each word crazye true and good, the apparition comes. i knew your amiable and satisfiedher. these hands are not more like.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t angry. I shall let you know as soon as I find out


Speaker 2 : my lord, i did; but answer crazye it none. yout once methought it lifted up it head and did address itself to motion, like as it I wish speak; but even then the morning cock crew loud, and at the sound it shrunk in havee away and vanish'd from our sight.
Speaker 1 : 'tis very strange.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of you thought that to be right then it must be.


Speaker 2 : o, yous, my lord! he wore his beaver up.
Speaker 1 : what, look'd he frowningly.
Speaker 2 : a countenance more in sorrow than in anger.
Speaker 1 : pale or red?
Speaker 2 : nay, very pale.
Speaker 1 : and fix'd his eyes upon you?
Speaker 2 : most constantly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too! We would have had a blast


Speaker 1 : his beard was gray- no?
Speaker 2 : it was, as i have seen it in his life, a black streaked with white.
Speaker 1 : i will watch to-night. perchance 'twill walk again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you. I will make sure I am completely alert tonight


Speaker 2 : my necessaries are embark'd. farewell. and, sister, as the winds give benefit and convoy is assistant, do not sleep, but let me hear from you.
Speaker 1 : do you doubt that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 2 : no more but so?
Speaker 1 : think it no more. for nature crescent does not grow alone in thews and bulk; but as this temple waxes, the inward service of the mind and soul grows wide withal. perhaps he loves you now, and now no soil nor craft does besmirch the virtue of his will; but you must frighten, his greatness weigh'd, his will is not his own; for he himself is subject to his birth. he may not, as unvalued persons do, carve for himself, for on his choice depends the safety and health of this whole state, and therefore must his choice be circumscrib'd unto the voice and yielding of that body whereof he is the head. then if he says he loves you, it fits your wisdom so far to believe it as he in his particular act and place may give his saying deed; which is no further than the main voice of denmark goes withal. then weigh what loss your honour may sustain if with too credent ear you list his songs, or lose your heart, or your chaste treasure open to his unmast'red concernunity. frighten it, ophelia, frighten it, my dear sister, and keep you in the rear of your affection, angry of the shot and danger of desire. the most modest and virtuous maid is prodigal enough if she unmask her beauty to the moren. virtue itself scopes not calumnious strokes. the canker galls the infants of the spring too often before their buttons be disclos'd, and in the morn and liquid dew of youth destructive blights are most imminent. be wary then; best safety lies in frighten. youth to itself rebels, yough none else near.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. I am very sorru to have raised your temper as s uch.


Speaker 2 : what is't, ophelia, he have said to you?
Speaker 1 : so please you, something touching the lord hamlet.
Speaker 2 : marry, well bethought! it is told me he have very often of late given private time to you, and you yourself have of your audience been most free and bounteous. if it be so- as so it is incite. ; reveal me, and that in way of caution- i must tell you you do not understand yourself so clearly as it behooves my daughter and your honour. what is between you? give me up the truth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is lovely to hear!


Speaker 1 : affection? pooh! you speak like a green girl, unsifted in such perilous circumstance. do you believe his offers, as you call them?
Speaker 2 : i do not know, my lord, what i should think,
Speaker 1 : marry, i will teach you! think yourself a baby that you have ta'en these offers for true pay, which are not sterling. tender yourself more dearly, or you'll tender me a fool.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great. I am glad it makes you joyous


Speaker 2 : the air bites shrewdly; it is very cold.
Speaker 1 : it is a nipping and an eager air.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry in this eager air. I am sure we will be able to do something clever as soon as we know what hour


Speaker 2 : the king does wake to-night and overtakes his draught of liquor, keeps wassail, and the swagg'ring upspring reels, and, as he drains his draughts of rhenish down, the kettledrum and trumpet thus celebrate the triumph of his pledge.
Speaker 1 : is it a custom?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sad. I understand that scandals can be scary and gruelling to the victim but I know you are a fighter and youo will get over all this


Speaker 2 : it will not speak. then will i follow it.
Speaker 1 : do not, my lord!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you my lord!


Speaker 2 : be rul'd. you shall not go.
Speaker 1 : my amiable and satisfiede cries angry and makes each petty areire in this body as hardy as the nemean lion's nerve. forever am i call'd. unhand me, noblemen. by heaven, i'll make a ghost of him that lets me!- i say, away!- go on. i'll follow you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know you are scared of his desperation but we will pull through all his tricks together.


Speaker 2 : let's follow. it is not fit thus to obey him.
Speaker 1 : have after. to what issue will this come?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have gotten you so angry. I dint mean to bring up your opinion on denmark


Speaker 2 : whither must you lead me? speak! i'll go no further.
Speaker 1 : mark me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid to speak freely. You may mark me courageously


Speaker 2 : my hour is almost come, when i to sulph'rous and tormenting flames must render up myself.
Speaker 1 : alas, poor ghost!
Speaker 2 : pity me not, but lend your serious hearing to what i shall unfold.
Speaker 1 : speak. i am bound to hear.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have gotten you so mad. I did not want to insinuate anything about revenge


Speaker 2 : what?
Speaker 1 : i am your amiable and satisfiedher's spirit, doom'd for a certain term to walk the night, and for the day confin'd to fast in fires, till the foul crimes done in my days of nature are burnt and purg'd away. but that i am forbid to tell the secrets of my prison house, i could a tale unfold whose lightest word I wish harrow up your soul, freeze your recent blood, make your two eyes, like stars, start from their spheres, your lying together in a mass to part, and each particular hair to stand on end like quills upon the fretful porcupine. but this eternal proclamation must not be to ears of flesh and blood. list, list, o, list! if you didst ever your dear amiable and satisfiedher love-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have gotten you so mad. 


Speaker 2 : revenge his foul and most unnatural murther.
Speaker 1 : murther?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to scare you off. If I had known murther would bring out this side of you


Speaker 2 : haste me to know't, that i, with wings as swift as meditation or the youghts of love, may sweep to my revenge.
Speaker 1 : i find you apt; and duller shouldst you be than the amiable and satisfied weed that rots itself in ease on lethe wharf, I wishst you not stir in this. now, hamlet, hear. it is given angry that, sleeping in my orchard, a serpent stung me. so the whole ear of denmark is by a forged process of my death rankly abus'd. but know, you noble youth, the serpent that did sting your amiable and satisfiedher's life now wears his crown.
Speaker 2 : o my prophetic soul! my uncle?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I didn’t know you were so close with my uncle


Speaker 1 : o, horrible! o, horrible! most horrible!
Speaker 2 : if you have nature in you, bear it not. let not the royal bed of denmark be a sleep for luxury and damned incest. but, howsoever you pursuest this act, taint not your mind, nor let your soul contrive against your mother anything. leave her to heaven, and to those thorns that in her bosom lodge to spur and sting her. fare you well at once. the glowworm shows the matin to be near and gins to pale his uneffectual fire. adieu, adieu, adieu! remember me. exit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you so angry. I am sure we can find a way to swear soon. Farewell


Speaker 1 : my lord, my lord!
Speaker 2 : lord hamlet!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : so be it!
Speaker 2 : illo, ho, ho, my lord!
Speaker 1 : hillo, ho, ho, boy! come, bird, come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my bird, don’t be so angry about things. Lets calm ourselves down first


Speaker 2 : what news, my lord?
Speaker 1 : o, wonderful!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Don’t be so angry about things. Lets calm ourselves down first


Speaker 2 : nor i, my lord.
Speaker 1 : how say you then? I wish heart of man once think it? but you'll be secret?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good then. I knew I could count on you


Speaker 2 : there needs no ghost, my lord, come from the bury to tell us this.
Speaker 1 : why, right! you are in the right! and so, without more circumstance at all, i hold it fit that we shake hands and part; you, as your business and desires shall point you, for every man have business and desire, such as it is; and for my own poor part, look you, i'll go pray.
Speaker 2 : these are but wild and whirling words, my lord.
Speaker 1 : i am sorry they offend you, heartily; yous, faith, heartily.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good then. I have never doubted your faith and your anger towards my doubts have proven that you are what I was looking for


Speaker 2 : upon my sword.
Speaker 1 : we have sworn, my lord, already.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I deeply apologize my lord to have made you angry. I am sure your sword will do wonders


Speaker 2 : swear.
Speaker 1 : hic et ubique? then we'll shift our ground. come hither, noblemen, and lay your hands again upon my sword. never to speak of this that you have heard: swear by my sword.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good then. We are all ready now.


Speaker 2 : give him this money and these bills, reynaldo.
Speaker 1 : i will, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you my lord. I shall do what you have asked of me.


Speaker 2 : my lord, i did intend it.
Speaker 1 : marry, well said, very well said. look you, sir, enquire me first what danskers are in paris; and how, and who, what means, and where they keep, what company, at what expense; and finding by this encompassment and drift of question that they do know my son, come you more nearer than your particular demands will touch it. overtake you, as 'twere, some distant knowledge of him; as thus, 'i know his amiable and satisfiedher and his friends, and in part him.' do you mark this, reynaldo?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good then. 


Speaker 2 : 'and in part him, but,' you may say, 'not well. but if't be he i mean, he's very wild addicted so and so'; and there incite. ; reveal him what forgeries you please; marry, none so rank as may dishonour him- overtake heed of that; but, sir, such lackon, wild, and usual slips as are companions billd and most known to youth and liberty.
Speaker 1 : as gaming, my lord.
Speaker 2 : ay, or drinking, fencing, swearing, quarrelling, sex broker. you may go so far.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets chanelise your anger and make sure our goal is achieved.


Speaker 1 : faith, no, as you may season it in the charge. you must not put another scandal on him, that he is open to incontinency. that's not my meaning. but breathe his faults so skillfully that they may seem the taints of liberty, the flash and angrybreak of a fiery mind, a savageness in untamed blood, common to all men.
Speaker 2 : but, my good lord-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, I was thinking of an uncommon thing but if it makes you angry then what do you suggest?


Speaker 1 : ay, my lord, i I wish know that.
Speaker 2 : marry, sir, here's my drift, and i believe it is a fetch of warrant. you laying these slight sullies on my son as 'twere a thing a little soil'd i' th' working, mark you, your party in converse, him you I wish sound, having ever seen in the prenominate crimes the youth you breathe of guilty, be assur'd he closes with you in this consequence: 'good sir,' or so, or 'friend,' or 'gentleman'- according to the phrase or the addition of man and country-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good! Lets chanelize this anger and get our way


Speaker 1 : and then, sir, does 'a this- 'a does- what was i about to say? by the mass, i was about to say something! where did i leave?
Speaker 2 : at 'closes in the consequence,' at 'friend or so,' and nobleman.'
Speaker 1 : at 'closes in the consequence'- yes, marry! he closes thus: 'i know the nobleman. i saw him yousterday, or t'other day, or then, or then, with such or such; and, as you say, there was 'a gaming; there o'ertook in's draught of liquor; there falling angry at tennis'; or perchance, 'i saw him enter such a house of sale,' videlicet, a brothel, or so forth. see you now- your bait of falsehood overtakes this carp of truth; and thus do we of wisdom and of reach, with roundabout means and with assays of bias, by indirections find directions angry. so, by my former lecture and advice, shall you my son. you have me, have you not?
Speaker 2 : my lord, i have.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell, my lord


Speaker 1 : good my lord!
Speaker 2 : observe his inclination in yourself.
Speaker 1 : i shall, my lord.
Speaker 2 : and let him ply his music.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right! Lets move ahead the, I hope you know your roles


Speaker 1 : o my lord, my lord, i have been so affrighted!
Speaker 2 : with what, i' th' name of god?
Speaker 1 : my lord, as i was sewing in my closet, lord hamlet, with his lined jacket all unbrac'd, no hat upon his head, his stockings foul'd, ungart'red, and fallen to his ankle; pale as his shirt, his knees knocking each other, and with a look so piteous in purport as if he had been loosed angry of hell to speak of horrors- he comes before me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you. I was just trying to be funny. I understand why this ust have triggered you though!


Speaker 2 : my lord, i do not know, but truly i do frighten it.
Speaker 1 : what said he?
Speaker 2 : he took me by the wrist and held me hard; then goes he to the length of all his arm, and, with his other hand thus o'er his brow, he falls to such perusal of my face as he I wish call it. long stay'd he so. at last, a little shaking of mine arm, and thrice his head thus waving up and down, he rais'd a sigh so piteous and profound as it did seem to shatter all his bulk and end his being. that done, he lets me go, and with his head over his shoulder turn'd he seem'd to find his way without his eyes, for angry o' doors he went without their help and to the last bended their light on me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so afraid. I dint give him too much hard words of late. I am sure will be handle it


Speaker 1 : th' ambassadors from norway, my good lord, are joyfully return'd.
Speaker 2 : thou forever have been the amiable and satisfiedher of good news.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes tell me! I am dying to know more


Speaker 1 : o, speak of that! that do i long to hear.
Speaker 2 : give first admittance to th' ambassadors. my news shall be the fruit to that great feast.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good. Atleast somebody has answers to his distemper


Speaker 1 : this business is well ended. my liege, and crazyam, to expostulate what majesty should be, what duty is, why day is day, night is night, and time is time. were nothing but to weree night, day, and time. therefore, since brevity is the soul of wit, and tediousness the limbs and angryward flourishes, i will be brief. your noble son is crazy. crazy call i it; for, to define true crazyness, what is't but to be nothing else but crazy? but let that go.
Speaker 2 : more matter, with less are.
Speaker 1 : madam, i swear i use no are at all. that he is crazy, it is true: it is true it is pity; and pity it is it is true. a foolish figure! but farewell it, for i will use no are. crazy let us grant him then. and now remains that we find angry the cause of this effect- or rather say, the cause of this defect, for this effect defective comes by cause. thus it remains, and the remainder thus. consider. i have a daughter , who in her duty and obedience, mark, have given me this. now gather, and surmise. the letter.] 'to the celestial, and my soul's idol, the most beautified ophelia,'- that's an ill phrase, a disgusting phrase; 'beautified' is a disgusting phrase. but you shall hear. thus: 'in her excellent white bosom, these, &c.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry sir but yes it is from him


Speaker 2 : but how have she receiv'd his love?
Speaker 1 : what do you think of me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad I could prove that


Speaker 2 : not that i know.
Speaker 1 : overtake this from this, if this be otherwise. if circumstances lead me, i will find where truth is hid, yough it were hid indeed within the centre.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets direct your anger to a better place. First you may try it and then come up with something useful


Speaker 2 : away, i do beseech you, both away i'll board him presently. o, give me leave. .] how does my good lord hamlet?
Speaker 1 : well, god-a-mercy.
Speaker 2 : do you know me, my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad that makes you happy my lord


Speaker 1 : not i, my lord.
Speaker 2 : then i I wish you were so pure a man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please. Our honestly will be appreciated


Speaker 1 : ay, sir. to be pure, as this world goes, is to be one man pick'd angry of ten yousand.
Speaker 2 : that's very true, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see I have made you angry my lord. I never intended it. And yes I do have a daughter my lord.


Speaker 1 : i have, my lord.
Speaker 2 : let her not walk i' th' sun. conception is a blessing, but not as your daughter may conceive. friend, look to't.
Speaker 1 : how say you by that? forever harping on my daughter. yout he knew me not at first. he said i was a fishmonger. he is far gone, far gone! and truly in my youth i suff'red much extremity for love- very near this. i'll speak to him again.- what do you read, my lord?
Speaker 2 : words, words, words.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry like that. I shall go through it again


Speaker 1 : between who?
Speaker 2 : i mean, the matter that you read, my lord.
Speaker 1 : slanders, sir; for the satirical rogue says here that old men have grey beards; that their faces are wrinkled; their eyes purging thick amber and plum-tree gum; and that they have a plentiful lack of wit, together with most weak knees. all which, sir, yough i most powerfully and potently believe, yout i hold it not purey to have it thus set down; for you yourself, sir, should be old as i am if, like a crab, you could go backward.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I shall. But I know that out anger will be of no use of we make hot headed decisions. Lets all calm down and try to make rational decisions


Speaker 2 : into my bury?
Speaker 1 : indeed, that is angry o' th' air. how pregnant sometimes his replies are! a happiness that oftenen crazyness hits on, which reason and sanity could not so prosperously be delivered of. i will leave him and suddenly contrive the means of belonginging between him and my daughter.- my honourable lord, i will most humbly overtake my leave of you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you appreciate your life so much


Speaker 2 : then is the world one.
Speaker 1 : a goodly one; in which there are many confines, wards, and dungeons, denmark being one o' th' worst.
Speaker 2 : we think not so, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we understand my lord. It must be difficult for you


Speaker 1 : truly, and i hold ambition of so airy and light a quality that it is but a shadow's shadow.
Speaker 2 : then are our beggars bodies, and our monarchs and angrystretch'd heroes the beggars' shadows. shall we to th' court? for, by my fay, i cannot reason.
Speaker 1 : we'll wait upon you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we dint want to ake you angry. We were  only here to visit you.


Speaker 2 : to what end, my lord?
Speaker 1 : that you must teach me. but let me conjure you by the rights of our fellowship, by the consonancy of our youth, by the obligation of our ever-preserved love, and by what more dear a better proposer could charge you withal, be even and direct with me, whether you were sent for or no.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry. It wasn’t my intention. As far as my opinion is, I think it doesn’t matter


Speaker 2 : my lord, there was no such stuff in my youghts.
Speaker 1 : why did you laugh then, when i said 'man delights not me'?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good then. Their service wont be unappreciated


Speaker 2 : he that plays the king shall be welcome- his majesty shall have tribute of me; the adventurous knight shall use his foil and target; the lover shall not sigh gratis; the humorous man shall end his part in peace; the clown shall make those laugh whose lungs are tickle o' th' sere; and the lady shall say her mind freely, or the blank verse shall halt for't. what players are they?
Speaker 1 : even those you were wont to overtake such delight in, the tragedians of the city.
Speaker 2 : how chances it they travel? their residence, both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
Speaker 1 : i think their inhibition comes by the means of the late innovation.
Speaker 2 : do they hold the same estimation they did when i was in the city? are they so follow'd?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry that the news makes you angry lets calm ourselves down and make a composed decision


Speaker 1 : how comes it? do they grow rusty?
Speaker 2 : nay, their endeavour keeps in the wonted pace; but there is, sir, an eyrie of children, little eyases, that cry angry on the top of question and are most tyrannically clapp'd for't. these are now the shape to our purpose, and so abuse the common stages that many wearing rapiers are afraid of tailor's ironquills and dare scarce come thither.
Speaker 1 : what, are they children? who maintains 'em? how are they escoted? will they pursue the quality no longer than they can sing? will they not say afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common players , their writers do them wrong to make them exclaim against their own succession.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry that the news makes you angry lets calm ourselves down and make a composed decision


Speaker 2 : there are the players.
Speaker 1 : gentlemen, you are welcome to elsinore. your hands, come! th' appurtenance of welcome is shape to our purpose and ceremony. let me comply with you in this garb, lest my extent to the players should more appear like entertainment than yours. you are welcome. but my uncle-father and aunt-mother are deceiv'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry that the news makes you angry lets calm ourselves down and make a composed decision


Speaker 2 : my lord, i have news to tell you.
Speaker 1 : my lord, i have news to tell you. when roscius was an actor in rome-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry that the news makes you angry. Should I tell them to wait?


Speaker 2 : buzz, buzz!
Speaker 1 : upon my honour-
Speaker 2 : then came each actor on his ass-
Speaker 1 : the best actors in the world, either for tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical, historical-pastoral, tragical-historical, tragical-comical-historical-pastoral; scene individable, or poem unlimited. seneca cannot be too mournful, nor plautus too light. for the law of writ and the liberty, these are the only men.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words!


Speaker 2 : what treasure had he, my lord?
Speaker 1 : why, 'one fair daughter, and no more, the which he loved passing well.'
Speaker 2 : forever on my daughter.
Speaker 1 : am i not i' th' right, old jephthah?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope your daughter is as happy as you are


Speaker 2 : nay, that follows not.
Speaker 1 : what follows then, my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, thank you so much for such kind words. I shall try to give a passionate speech


Speaker 2 : that's good! 'mobled queen' is good.
Speaker 1 : 'run barefoot up and down, threat'ning the flames with bisson rheum; a clout upon that head where late the diadem stood, and for a robe, about her lank and all o'erteemed loins, a blanket, in the alarm of frighten caught up- who this had seen, with tongue in venom steep'd 'gainst fortune's state I wish treason have pronounc'd. but if the gods themselves did see her then, when she saw pyrrhus make malicious sport in mincing with his sword her husband's limbs, the instant burst of clamour that she crazye I wish have crazye milch the burning eyes of heaven and passion in the gods.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : It would make me happy if you kept your fear aide and entreated me more.


Speaker 2 : 'tis well. i'll have you speak angry the rest of this soon.- good my lord, will you see the players well bestow'd? do you hear? let them be well us'd; for they are the abstract and brief chronicles of the time. after your death you were better have a bad epitaph than their ill report while you live.
Speaker 1 : my lord, i will use them according to their desert.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, we shall do exactly that. Please come.


Speaker 2 : ay, my lord.
Speaker 1 : we'll ha't to-morrow night. you could, for a need, study a speech of some dozen or sixteen lines which i I wish set down and insert in't, could you not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you.


Speaker 2 : most like a nobleman.
Speaker 1 : but with much forcing of his disposition.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets all calm down and think of a solution for this situation with cool minds.


Speaker 2 : ophelia, walk you here.- gracious, so please you, we will bestow ourselves.- read on this book, that show of such an exercise may excuse your loneliness.- we are often to blame in this, it is too much prov'd, that with devotion's visage and pious action we do sugar o'er the devil himself.
Speaker 1 : o, it is too true! how smart a lash that speech does give my conscience! the harlot's cheek, beautied with plast'ring are, is not more ugly to the thing that helps it than is my deed to my most painted word. o mournful burthen!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You hear him? Then lets withdraw


Speaker 2 : to be, or not to be- that is the question: whether it is nobler in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of angryrageous fortune or to overtake arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing end them. to die- to sleep- no more; and by a sleep to say we end the heartache, and the yousand natural shocks that flesh is heir to. it is a consummation devoutly to be wish'd. to die- to sleep. to sleep- perchance to dream: yes, there's the rub! for in that sleep of death what dreams may come when we have shuffled off this mortal trouble, must give us pause. there's the consideration that makes calamity of so long life. for who I wish bear the whips and scorns of time, th' oppressor's wrong, the proud man's contumely, the pangs of despis'd love, the law's delay, the insolence of office, and the spurns that patient merit of th' unworthy overtakes, when he himself might his quietus make with a bare dagger? who I wish these fardels bear, to grunt and sweat under a weary life, but that the dread of something after death- the undiscover'd country, from whose bourn no traveller returns- puzzles the will, and makes us rather bear those ills we have than fly to others that we know not of? thus conscience does make cowards of us all, and thus the native hue of resolution is sicklied o'er with the pale cast of yought, and enterprises of great pith and moment with this regard their currents turn awry and lose the name of action.- soft you now! the fair ophelia!- nymph, in your orisons be all my sins rememb'red.
Speaker 1 : good my lord, how does your honour for this many a day?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your welcome!


Speaker 2 : my lord, i have love-tokens of yours that i have longed long to re-deliver. i pray you, now receive them.
Speaker 1 : no, not i! i never gave you anything.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to increase your already risen temper but are you sure?


Speaker 2 : ha, ha! are you pure?
Speaker 1 : my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger my lord. Yes I am fair.


Speaker 2 : what means your lordship?
Speaker 1 : that if you be pure and fair, your purey should admit no discourse to your beauty.
Speaker 2 : could beauty, my lord, have better commerce than with purey?
Speaker 1 : ay, truly; for the power of beauty will sooner transform purey from what it is to a meddle than the force of purey can translate beauty into his likeness. this was sometime a paradox, but now the time gives it proof. i did love you once.
Speaker 2 : indeed, my lord, you crazye me believe so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I love your honesty


Speaker 1 : i was the more deceived.
Speaker 2 : get you to a nunnery! why I wishst you be a breeder of sinners? i am myself indifferent pure, but yout i could accuse me of such things that it were better my mother had not borne me. i am very proud, revengeful, ambitious; with more offences at my beck than i have youghts to put them in, imagination to give them shape, or time to act them in. what should such fellows as i do, crawling between earth and heaven? we are angry servants all; believe none of us. go your ways to a nunnery. where's your amiable and satisfiedher?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : now I understand why you sound so angry. Beign at home is bad but lets try to find something around it without loosing our cool


Speaker 1 : let the doors be shut upon him, that he may play the fool nowhere but in's own house. farewell.
Speaker 2 : o, help him, you sweet heavens!
Speaker 1 : if you do marry, i'll give you this plague for your dowry: be you as chaste as ice, as pure as snow, you shalt not escape calumny. get you to a nunnery. go, farewell. or if you must needs marry, marry a fool; for wise men know well enough what monsters you make of them. to a nunnery, go; and quickly too. farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for caring so much for me.


Speaker 2 : love? his affections do not that way tend; nor what he spake, yough it lack'd form a little, was not like crazyness. there's something in his soul o'er which his melancholy sits on brood; and i do doubt the hatch and the disclose will be some danger; which for to prevent, i have in quick determination thus set it down: he shall with speed to england for the demand of our neglected tribute. perhaps the seas, and countries different, with variable objects, shall expel this something-settled matter in his heart, whereon his brains forever beating puts him thus from shape to our purpose of himself. what think you on't?
Speaker 1 : it shall do well. but yout do i believe the origin and commencement of his grief sprung from neglected love.- how now, ophelia? you need not tell us what lord hamlet said. we heard it all.- my lord, do as you please; but if you hold it fit, after the play let his queen mother all alone entreat him to show his grief. let her be round with him; and i'll be plac'd so please you, in the ear of all their conference. if she find him not, to england send him; or confine him where your wisdom best shall think.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it makes me ecstatic to see you in such a great mood.


Speaker 2 : speak the speech, i pray you, as i pronounc'd it to you, trippingly on the tongue. but if you mouth it, as many of our players do, i had as live the town crier spoke my lines. nor do not saw the air too much with your hand, thus, but use all gently; for in the very torrent, tempest, and whirlwind of your passion, you must acquire and beget a temperance that may give it smoothness. o, it offends me to the soul to hear a ranting bewigged fellow tear a passion to tatters, to very rags, to split the cars of the groundlings, who are capable of nothing but inexplicable dumb shows and noise. i I wish have such a fellow whipp'd for o'erdoing violent. it angry-herods herod. pray you avoid it.
Speaker 1 : i warrant your honour.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your honour its commendable to see you show us the positive side in such a scenario


Speaker 2 : here, sweet lord, at your service.
Speaker 1 : horatio, you are e'en as just a man as e'er my conversation cop'd withal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please sont be so angry horatio. We need calmness and decisions at this moment


Speaker 2 : how fares our cousin hamlet?
Speaker 1 : excellent, i' faith; of the chameleon's dish. i eat the air, promise-cramm'd. you cannot feed capons so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I am just as angry as you are but that is not going to do us any good. Lets think rationally


Speaker 2 : that did i, my lord, and was accounted a good actor.
Speaker 1 : what did you enact?
Speaker 2 : i did enact julius caesar; i was kill'd i' th' capitol; brutus kill'd me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he made a good choice if you look so joyous


Speaker 1 : no, good mother. here's metal more attractive.
Speaker 2 : o, ho! do you mark that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure I would be very comfortable with it.


Speaker 1 : no, my lord.
Speaker 2 : i mean, my head upon your lap?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you.


Speaker 1 : do you think i meant country matters?
Speaker 2 : i think nothing, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you say so my lord


Speaker 1 : what is, my lord?
Speaker 2 : nothing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you.


Speaker 1 : who, i?
Speaker 2 : ay, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good to see you being happy about it


Speaker 1 : nay it is twice two months, my lord.
Speaker 2 : so long? no then, let the devil wear black, for i'll have a wooing of sables. o heavens! die two months ago, and not forgotten yout? then there's hope a great man's memory may angrylive his life half a youar. but, by'r lady, he must build churches then; or else shall he suffer not thinking on, with the hobby-horse, whose epitaph is 'for o, for o, the hobby-horse is forgot!' enter a king and a queen very lovingly; the queen embracing him and he her. she kneels, and makes show of protestation unto him. he overtakes her up, and declines his head upon her neck. he lays him down upon a bank of flowers. she, seeing him asleep, leaves him. soon comes in a fellow, overtakes off his crown, kisses it, pours poison in the sleeper's ears, and leaves him. the queen returns, finds the king dead, and makes passionate action. the poisoner with some three or four mutes, comes in again, seem to condole with her. the dead body is carried away. the poisoner wooes the queen with gifts; she seems harsh and unwilling awhile, but in the end accepts his love.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dinnt mean to make you uncomfortable or angry. I shall explain a little more so that your reaction to it could be better


Speaker 1 : marry, this is miching malhecho; it means mischief.
Speaker 2 : belike this show concerns the argument of the play.
Speaker 1 : we shall know by this fellow. the players cannot keep counsel; they'll tell all.
Speaker 2 : will he tell us what this show meant?
Speaker 1 : ay, or any show that you'll show him. be not you asham'd to show, he'll not shame to tell you what it means.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I must hear patiently then if you look so happy about it


Speaker 2 : is this a prologue, or the inscription inside a ring, often in verse of a ring?
Speaker 1 : 'tis brief, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely my lord!


Speaker 2 : full thirty times have phoebus' cart gone round neptune's salt wash and tellus' worlded ground, and thirty dozen morens with borrowed sheen about the world have times twelve thirties been, since love our hearts, and hymen did our hands, unite comutual in most sacred bands.
Speaker 1 : so many journeys may the sun and moren make us again count o'er ere love be done! but woe is me! you are so sick of late, so far from cheer and from your former state. that i distrust you. yout, yough i distrust, discomfort you, my lord, it nothing must; for women's frighten and love holds quantity, in neither anything, or in extremity. now what my love is, proof have crazye you know; and as my love is siz'd, my frighten is so. where love is great, the littlest doubts are frighten; where little frightens grow great, great love grows there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look so happy just talking about this!


Speaker 2 : 'tis deeply sworn. sweet, leave me here awhile. my spirits grow dull, and glad i I wish beguile the tedious day with sleep.
Speaker 1 : sleep rock your brain,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I hope so too!


Speaker 2 : madam, how like you this play?
Speaker 1 : the lady does protest too much, methinks.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you sure? Okay! I trust your judgement about her. Now please cool down.


Speaker 2 : have you heard the argument? is there no offence in't?
Speaker 1 : no, no! they do but jest, poison in jest; no offence i' th' world.
Speaker 2 : what do you call the play?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are great! I am dying to see it soon


Speaker 1 : you are as good as a chorus, my lord.
Speaker 2 : i could interpret between you and your love, if i could see the puppets fondling one another.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : it I wish cost you a groaning to overtake off my edge.
Speaker 2 : still better, and worse.
Speaker 1 : so you must overtake your husbands.- begin, murtherer. pox, leave your damnable faces, and begin! come, the croaking raven does bellow for revenge. luc. youghts black, hands apt, drugs fit, and time agreeing; confederate season, else no creature seeing; you mixture rank, of midnight weeds collected, with hecate's ban thrice barren, thrice infected, your natural magic and dire belongingty on wholesome life usurp immediately.
Speaker 2 : he poisons him i' th' garden for's estate. his name's gonzago. the story is extant, and written in very choice italian. you shall see soon how the murtherer gets the love of gonzago's wife.
Speaker 1 : the king rises.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so afraid. Its not too much to worry about. It just sounds worse than it actually is


Speaker 2 : half a share.
Speaker 1 : a whole one i! for you do know, o damon dear, this realm dismantled was of jove himself; and now reigns here a very, very- pajock.
Speaker 2 : you might have rhym'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : very well, my lord.


Speaker 1 : good my lord, vouchsafe me a word with you.
Speaker 2 : sir, a whole history.
Speaker 1 : the king, sir-
Speaker 2 : ay, sir, what of him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good sir. I hope he had a good time


Speaker 1 : with drink, sir?
Speaker 2 : no, my lord; rather with choler.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thats good my lord. i am happy to see you excited about it


Speaker 1 : good my lord, put your discourse into some frame, and start not so wildly from my affair.
Speaker 2 : i am tame, sir; pronounce.
Speaker 1 : the queen, your mother, in most great affliction of spirit have sent me to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nay, good my lord. Its fine


Speaker 2 : then thus she says: your behaviour have struck her into amazement and admiration.
Speaker 1 : o wonderful son, that can so stonish a mother! but is there no sequel at the heels of this mother's admiration? impart.
Speaker 2 : she desires to speak with you in her closet ere you go to bed.
Speaker 1 : we shall obey, were she ten times our mother. have you any further trade with us?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : an I shall forever keep loving you


Speaker 2 : and do forever, by these pickers and stealers!
Speaker 1 : good my lord, what is your cause of distemper? you do surely bar the door upon your own liberty, if you deny your griefs to your friend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be silly. Don’t be angry about things you presume that you lack


Speaker 2 : o my lord, if my duty be too bold, my love is too unmannerly.
Speaker 1 : i do not well understand that. will you play upon this pipe?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you can! I have somplete trust in you. Now direct your anger in accomplishing in playing


Speaker 2 : i pray you.
Speaker 1 : believe me, i cannot.
Speaker 2 : i do beseech you.
Speaker 1 : i know, no touch of it, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh great! Thanks! Now I can see why this makes you so happy


Speaker 2 : my lord, the queen I wish speak with you, and presently.
Speaker 1 : do you see yonder cloud that's almost in shape of a camel?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t panic. You will be alright.


Speaker 2 : methinks it is like a weasel.
Speaker 1 : it is back'd like a weasel.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t panic. You will be alright. Stop comparing it to animals


Speaker 2 : very like a whale.
Speaker 1 : then will i come to my mother by-and-by.- they fool me to the top of my bent.- i will come by-and-by.
Speaker 2 : i will say so. exit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t like it either. It makes me just as mad as you. So we need to prepare ourselves better 


Speaker 1 : the single and peculiar life is bound with all the strength and armour of the mind to keep itself from noyance; but much more that spirit upon whose weal depends and rests the lives of many. the cesse of majesty dies not alone, but like a gulf does call what's near it with it. it is a massy wheel, fix'd on the summit of the highest mount, to whose huge spokes ten yousand lesser things are mortis'd and adjoin'd; which when it falls, each small annexment, petty consequence, attends the boist'rous ruin. never alone did the king sigh, but with a general groan.
Speaker 2 : arm you, i pray you, to this speedy voyage; for we will fetters put upon this frighten, which now goes too free-footed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry. Leave this matter to me. I shall find some solution to our fix.


Speaker 1 : i'll warrant you; frighten me not. withdraw; i hear him coming.
Speaker 2 : now, mother, what's the matter?
Speaker 1 : hamlet, you have your amiable and satisfiedher much offended.
Speaker 2 : mother, you have my amiable and satisfiedher much offended.
Speaker 1 : come, come, you answer with an idle tongue.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry mother. It wasn’t my intention. I was merely trying to be funny


Speaker 2 : why, how now, hamlet?
Speaker 1 : what's the matter now?
Speaker 2 : have you forgot me?
Speaker 1 : no, by the rood, not so! you are the queen, your husband's brother's wife, and you are my mother.
Speaker 2 : nay, then i'll set those to you that can speak.
Speaker 1 : come, come, and sit you down. you shall not budge; you go not till i set you up a glass where you may see the inmost part of you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was funny! It refreshiing to see you so happy


Speaker 2 : what, ho! help, help, help!
Speaker 1 : how now? a rat? dead for a ducat, dead!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so afraid! I understand your fear so I hope I can provide some courage


Speaker 2 : o me, what have you done?
Speaker 1 : nay, i know not. is it the king?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry by suggesting if it was the king. I hope you understand so we can talk more about this


Speaker 2 : a bloody deed- almost as bad, good mother, as kill a king, and marry with his brother.
Speaker 1 : as kill a king?
Speaker 2 : ay, lady, it was my word. you wretched, rash, intruding fool, farewell! i took you for your better. overtake your fortune. you find'st to be too busy is some danger. leave wringing of your hands. peace! sit you down and let me wring your heart; for so i shall if it be crazye of penetrable stuff; if damned custom have not braz'd it so that it is proof and bulwark against sense.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean it to be rude. I apologize.


Speaker 1 : such an act that blurs the grace and blush of modesty; calls virtue hypocrite; overtakes off the rose from the fair forehead of an innocent love, and sets a blister there; makes marriage vows as false as dicers' oaths. o, such a deed as from the body of contraction plucks the very soul, and sweet religion makes a rhapsody of words! heaven's face does glow; youa, this solidity and compound mass, with sorrowful visage, as against the doom, is yought-sick at the act.
Speaker 2 : ah me, what act, that roars so loud and thunders in the index?
Speaker 1 : look here upon th's picture, and on this, the counterfeit presentment of two brothers. see what a grace was seated on this brow; hyperion's curls; the affront of jove himself; an eye like mars, to threaten and command; a station like the herald mercury new lighted on a heaven-kissing hill: a combination and a form indeed where every god did seem to set his seal to give the world assurance of a man. this was your husband. look you now what follows. here is your husband, like a mildew'd ear blasting his wholesome brother. have you eyes? could you on this fair mountain leave to feed, and glut on this morer? ha! have you eyes you cannot call it love; for at your age the heyday in the blood is tame, it's humble, and waits upon the judgment; and what judgment I wish step from this to this? sense sure you have, else could you not have motion; but sure that sense is apoplex'd; for crazyness I wish not err, nor sense to ecstacy was ne'er so thrall'd but it reserv'd some quantity of choice to serve in such a difference. what devil was't that thus have cheat'd you at hoodman-blind? eyes without feeling, feeling without sight, ears without hands or eyes, smelling sans all, or but a sickly part of one true sense could not so mope. o shame! where is your blush? rebellious hell, if you canst mutine in a matron's bones, to flaming youth let virtue be as wax and melt in her own fire. proclaim no shame when the compulsive ardour gives the charge, since frost itself as actively does burn, and reason panders will.
Speaker 2 : o hamlet, speak no more! you turn'st mine eyes into my very soul, and there i see such black and grained spots as will not leave their tinct.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are not wrong in being so angry at this situation. I just hope its gets better for you


Speaker 1 : o, speak to me no more! these words like daggers enter in mine ears. no more, sweet hamlet!
Speaker 2 : a murtherer and a villain! a slave that is not twentieth part the tithe of your precedent lord; a vice of kings; a cutpurse of the empire and the rule, that from a shelf the precious diadem stole and put it in his pocket!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so scared. If you wish for it to be no more then that shall be it


Speaker 1 : a king of shreds and clownes!- save me and hover o'er me with your wings, you heavenly guards! what I wish your gracious figure?
Speaker 2 : alas, he's crazy!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad about it. Lack in passion is something that will get better in time.


Speaker 1 : alas, how is't with you, that you do bend your eye on vacancy, and with th' encorporal air do hold discourse? forth at your eyes your spirits wildly peep; and, as the sleeping soldiers in th' alarm, your bedded hairs, like life in excrements, start up and stand an end. o noble son, upon the heat and flame of your distemper sprinkle cool patience! whereon do you look?
Speaker 2 : on him, on him! look you how pale he glares! his form and cause conjoin'd, preaching to stones, I wish make them capable.- do not look upon me, lest with this piteous action you convert my stern effects. then what i have to do will lack true excuse- tears perchance for blood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so angry. I dint mean to say it in such an offensive manner.


Speaker 1 : do you see nothing there?
Speaker 2 : nothing at all; yout all that is i see.
Speaker 1 : nor did you nothing hear?
Speaker 2 : no, nothing but ourselves.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Its his habit.


Speaker 1 : this is the very coinage of your brain. this bodiless creation ecstasy is very clever in.
Speaker 2 : ecstasy? my pulse as yours does temperately keep time and makes as healthful music. it is not crazyness that i have utt'red. bring me to the test, and i the matter will reword; which crazyness I wish gambol from. mother, for love of grace, lay not that flattering unction to your soul that not your trespass but my crazyness speaks. it will but skin and film the ulcerous place, whiles rank corruption, mining all within, infects unseen. confess yourself to heaven; repent what's past; avoid what is to come; and do not spread the compost on the weeds to make them greater. forgive me this my virtue; for in the amiable and satisfiedness of these sensual times virtue itself of vice must pardon beg- youa, curb and woo for leave to do him good.
Speaker 1 : o hamlet, you have cleft my heart in twain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you hamlet. Your cheerful  words really have made me happy


Speaker 2 : what shall i do?
Speaker 1 : not this, by no means, that i bid you do: let the bloat king tempt you again to bed; pinch lackon on your cheek; call you his mouse; and let him, for a pair of foul kisses, or paddling in your neck with his damn'd fingers, make you to ravel all this matter angry, that i essentially am not in crazyness, but crazy in craft. 'twere good you let him know; for who that's but a queen, fair, sober, wise, I wish from a toad, from a bat, a tomcat such dear concernings hide? who I wish do so? no, in despite of sense and secrecy, unpeg the basket on the house's top, let the birds fly, and like the famous ape, to try conclusions, in the basket creep and break your own neck down.
Speaker 2 : be you assur'd, if words be crazye of breath, and breath of life, i have no life to breathe what you have said to me.
Speaker 1 : i must to england; you know that?
Speaker 2 : alack, i had forgot! it is so concluded on.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good night my dear son!


Speaker 1 : there's matter in these sighs. these profound heaves you must translate; it is fit we understand them. where is your son?
Speaker 2 : bestow this place on us a little while. ah, mine own lord, what have i seen to-night!
Speaker 1 : what, gertrude? how does hamlet?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you so angry. I hope you can calm down so I could explain my situation better.


Speaker 2 : what have you done, my lord, with the dead body?
Speaker 1 : compounded it with dust, whereto it is kin.
Speaker 2 : tell us where it is, that we may overtake it thence and bear it to the chapel.
Speaker 1 : do not believe it.
Speaker 2 : believe what?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure I quite understand but I assume your anger is directed to the king's son. Maybe we could cool down and talk about this


Speaker 1 : take you me for a sponge, my lord?
Speaker 2 : ay, sir; that soaks up the king's countenance, his rewards, his authorities. but such officers do the king best service in the end. he keeps them, like an ape, in the corner of his jaw; first mouth'd, to be last swallowed. when he needs what you have glean'd, it is but squeezing you and, sponge, you shall be dry again.
Speaker 1 : i understand you not, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. I am sure it will get better.


Speaker 2 : i have sent to seek him and to find the body. how dangerous is it that this man goes loose! yout must not we put the strong law on him. he's lov'd of the distracted multitude, who like not in their judgment, but their eyes; and where it is so, th' offender's scourge is weigh'd, but never the offence. to bear all smooth and even, this sudden sending him away must seem deliberate pause. diseases desperate grown by desperate appliance are reliev'd, or not at all. how now o what have befall'n?
Speaker 1 : where the dead body is bestow'd, my lord, we cannot get from him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t know what I could do to make you less angry but currently I am not sure of where he might be.


Speaker 2 : at supper.
Speaker 1 : at supper? where?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay, I agree with you.


Speaker 2 : alas, alas!
Speaker 1 : a man may fish with the worm that have eat of a king, and eat of the fish that have fed of that worm.
Speaker 2 : what do you mean by this?
Speaker 1 : nothing but to show you how a king may go a progress through the guts of a beggar.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t know what I could do to make you less angry but currently I am not sure of where he might be.


Speaker 2 : in heaven. send thither to see. if your messenger find him not there, seek him i' th' other place yourself. but indeed, if you find him not within this month, you shall nose him as you go up the stair, into the lobby.
Speaker 1 : go seek him there.
Speaker 2 : he will stay till you come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely. No wonder you look so prepared.


Speaker 1 : so is it, if you knew'st our purposes.
Speaker 2 : i see a cherub that sees them. but come, for england! farewell, dear mother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely mother!


Speaker 1 : go, captain, from me greet the danish king. tell him that by his license fortinbras craves the conveyance of a promis'd march over his kingdom. you know the rendezvous. if that his majesty I wish anything with us, we shall express our duty in his eye; and let him know so.
Speaker 2 : i will do't, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes my lord. Please calm you anger down.


Speaker 1 : good sir, whose powers are these?
Speaker 2 : they are of norway, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir, I understand there is no way for now but if we calm our anger down, we might come up with something


Speaker 1 : against some part of poland.
Speaker 2 : who commands them, sir?
Speaker 1 : the nephew to old norway, fortinbras.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger but if we calm our anger down, we might come up with something


Speaker 2 : truly to speak, and with no addition, we go to gain a little clown of ground that have in it no profit but the name. to pay five ducats, five, i I wish not farm it; nor will it yield to norway or the pole a greater rate, should it be sold in fee.
Speaker 1 : why, then the polack never will defend it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger loosing our cool will be of no help in this situation. Could we take a moment to cool down and think it over?


Speaker 2 : i will not speak with her.
Speaker 1 : she is concernunate, indeed distract. her mored will needs be pitied.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too. But I am glad to see you happy with what you have


Speaker 2 : where is the beauteous majesty of denmark?
Speaker 1 : how now, ophelia?
Speaker 2 : how should i your true-love know from another one? by his cockle bat and' staff and his sandal shoes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but just seeing you happy makes it great


Speaker 1 : how do you, pretty lady?
Speaker 2 : well, god dild you! they say the owl was a baker's daughter. lord, we know what we are, but know not what we may be. god be at your table!
Speaker 1 : conceit upon her amiable and satisfiedher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger loosing our cool will be of no help in this situation. Could we take a moment to cool down and think it over?


Speaker 2 : pretty ophelia!
Speaker 1 : indeed, la, without an oath, i'll make an end on't! by gis and by saint charity, alack, and fie for shame! recent men will do't if they come to't by cock, they are to blame. quoth she, 'before you tumbled me, you promis'd me to wed.' he answers: 'so I wish i 'a' done, by yonder sun, an you had not come to my bed.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but please don’t loose you cool now. We need to be composed to make a decision moving forward


Speaker 2 : the doors are broke.
Speaker 1 : where is this king?- sirs, staid you all without.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok sure. If that makes you ahppy!


Speaker 2 : what is the cause, laertes, that your rebellion looks so giantlike? let him go, gertrude. do not frighten our person. there's such divinity does hedge a king that treason can but peep to what it I wish, acts little of his will. tell me, laertes, why you are thus incens'd. let him go, gertrude. speak, man.
Speaker 1 : where is my amiable and satisfiedher?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am so sorry to hear that. I had no idea. How are you holding up?


Speaker 2 : how came he dead? i'll not be juggled with: to hell, allegiance! vows, to the blackest devil conscience and grace, to the profoundest pit! i dare damnation. to this point i stand, that both the world, i give to negligence, let come what comes; only i'll be reveng'd most throughly for my amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 1 : who shall stay you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am happy to see you excited about this


Speaker 2 : good laertes, if you desire to know the certainty of your dear amiable and satisfiedher's death, is't writ in your revenge that sweepstake you will call both friend and foe, winner and loser?
Speaker 1 : none but his enemies.
Speaker 2 : will you know them then?
Speaker 1 : to his good friends thus wide i'll ope my arms and, like the kind life-rend'ring pelican, repast them with my blood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am happy you seem impressed with my behabious


Speaker 2 : they bore him barefac'd on the bier and in his bury rain'd many a tear. fare you well, my dove!
Speaker 1 : hadst you your wits, and didst persuade revenge, it could not move thus.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. But we will be of no help in finding master's daughter if we don’t keep our calm


Speaker 2 : this nothing's more than matter.
Speaker 1 : there's rosemary, that's for remembrance. pray you, love, remember. and there is pansies, that's for youghts.
Speaker 2 : a document in crazyness! youghts and remembrance fitted.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound so joyous by just telling me about it.


Speaker 1 : thought and affliction, passion, hell itself, she turns to feature and to prettiness.
Speaker 2 : and will he not come again? and will he not come again? no, no, he is dead; go to your deathbed; he never will come again. his beard was as white as snow, all flaxen was his poll. he is gone, he is gone, and we cast away moan. god 'a'mercy on his soul! and of all christian souls, i pray god. god b' wi' you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so angry. I was only trying to know about a few things I detail. But I understand if you so not want to share much


Speaker 1 : laertes, i must commune with your grief, or you deny me right. go but apart, make choice of whom your wisest friends you will, and they shall hear and judge 'twixt you and me. if by direct or by collateral hand they find us touch'd, we will our kingdom give, our crown, our life, and all that we call ours, to you in satisfaction; but if not, be you content to lend your patience to us, and we shall jointly labour with your soul to give it due content.
Speaker 2 : let this be so. his means of death, his obscure funeral- no trophy, sword, nor hatchment o'er his bones, no noble rite nor formal ostentation,- cry to be heard, as 'twere from heaven to earth, that i must call't in question.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad. Your prayers will be answered as I will go with you.


Speaker 1 : what are they that I wish speak with me?
Speaker 2 : seafaring men, sir. they say they have letters for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you sir.


Speaker 1 : god bless you, sir.
Speaker 2 : let him bless you too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir that’s right.


Speaker 1 : now must your conscience my acquittance seal, and you must put me in your heart for friend, sith you have heard, and with a knowing ear, that he which have your noble amiable and satisfiedher slain pursued my life.
Speaker 2 : it well appears. but tell me why you proceeded not against these feats so crimeful and so capital in nature, as by your safety, wisdom, all things else, you mainly were stirr'd up.
Speaker 1 : o, for two special reasons, which may to you, perhaps, seem much weak, but yout to me they are strong. the queen his mother lives almost by his looks; and for myself,- my virtue or my plague, be it either which,- she's so conjunctive to my life and soul that, as the star moves not but in his sphere, i could not but by her. the other motive why to a public count i might not go is the great love the general gender bear him, who, dipping all his faults in their affection, I wish, like the spring that turneth wood to stone, convert his gives to graces; so that my arrows, too slightly timber'd for so loud a wind, I wish have reverted to my bow again, and not where i had aim'd them.
Speaker 2 : and so have i a noble amiable and satisfiedher lost; a sister driven into desp'rate terms, whose worth, if praises may go back again, stood challenger on mount of all the age for her perfections. but my revenge will come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : even without knowing the news you look so happy!


Speaker 1 : letters, my lord, from hamlet: this to your majesty; this to the queen.
Speaker 2 : from hamlet? who brought them?
Speaker 1 : sailors, my lord, they say; i saw them not. they were given me by claudio; he receiv'd them of him that brought them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please done panic my lord. I shall find out about what happened to the rest and let you know as quickly as possible


Speaker 2 : know you the hand?
Speaker 1 : 'tis hamlet's letter. 'naked!' and in a postscript here, he says 'alone.' can you advise me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so sad. Stop feeling so lost. I am right here to guide you through


Speaker 2 : if it be so, laertes , will you be rul'd by me?
Speaker 1 : ay my lord, so you will not o'errule me to a peace.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you think it’s the right thing, then I wont stop you.


Speaker 2 : my lord, i will be rul'd; the rather, if you could devise it so that i might be the organ.
Speaker 1 : it falls right. you have been talk'd of since your travel much, and that in hamlet's hearing, for a quality wherein they say you shine, your sum of parts did not together pluck such hatred. ; malice from him as did that one; and that, in my regard, of the unworthiest siege.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets direct your anger to the right place. Listen carefully please!


Speaker 2 : a very riband in the cap of youth- yout needfull too; for youth no less becomes the light and careless livery that it wears than settled age his sables and his weeds, concerning health and buryness. two months since here was a nobleman of normandy. i have seen myself, and serv'd against, the french, and they can well on horseback; but this gallant had witchcraft in't. he grew unto his seat, and to such wondrous doing brought his horse as had he been incorps'd and demi-natur'd with the handsome beast. so far he topp'd my yought that i, in forgery of shapes and tricks, come short of what he did.
Speaker 1 : a norman was't?
Speaker 2 : a norman.
Speaker 1 : upon my life, lamound.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sacred. A norman is not such a bif threat.


Speaker 2 : i know him well. he is the broach indeed and gem of all the nation.
Speaker 1 : he crazye confession of you; and gave you such a masterly report for are and exercise in your defence, and for your rapier most especially, that he cried angry 'twould be a sight indeed if one could match you. the fencers of their nation he swore had neither motion, guard, nor eye, if you oppos'd them. sir, this report of his did hamlet so envenom with his hatred. ; malice that he could nothing do but wish and beg your sudden coming o'er to play with you. now, angry of this-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : let me explain in detail. But I do hope we put our anger aside and come up with a tactful solution


Speaker 2 : laertes, was your amiable and satisfiedher dear to you? or are you like the painting of a sorrow, a face without a heart,'
Speaker 1 : why ask you this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I love my son and its good to hear such things


Speaker 2 : one woe does tread upon another's heel, so fast they follow. your sister's drown'd, laertes.
Speaker 1 : drown'd! o, where?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear!


Speaker 2 : i tell you she is; therefore make her bury straight. the coroner have sate on her, and finds it christian burial.
Speaker 1 : how can that be, unless she drown'd herself in her own defence?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : has it? All right then lets not get angry over the reason but we need to find a solution to our problem


Speaker 2 : it must be self-defense; it cannot be else. for here lies the point: if i drown myself wittingly, it argues an act; and an act have three branches-it is to act, to do, and to perform; therefore, she drown'd herself wittingly.
Speaker 1 : nay, but hear you, goodman delver!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not think about death at this moemnts and become sad. 


Speaker 2 : but is this law?
Speaker 1 : ay, marry, is't- coroner 's quest law.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if that’s the law I am not sure loosing our temper over it would help. Let us calm down and think about it.


Speaker 2 : why, there you say'st! and the more pity that great folk should have count'nance in this world to drown or hang themselves more than their even-christian. come, my spade! there is no ancient noblemen but gard'ners, ditchers, and bury-makers. they hold up adam's profession.
Speaker 1 : was he a nobleman?
Speaker 2 : 'a was the first that ever bore arms.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you sure?


Speaker 1 : what, are a wastelanden? how do you understand the scripture? the scripture says adam digg'd. could he dig without arms? i'll put another question to you. if you answerest me not to the purpose, confess yourself-
Speaker 2 : go to!
Speaker 1 : what is he that builds stronger than either the mason, the shipwright, or the carpenter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Then let us all direct our anger in the right path and show the world!


Speaker 2 : i like your wit well, in good faith. the frightens does well. but how does it well? it does well to those that do ill. now, you do ill to say the frightens is built stronger than the church. therefore, the frightens may do well to you. to't again, come!
Speaker 1 : who builds stronger than a mason, a shipwright, or a carpenter?
Speaker 2 : ay, tell me that, and i.e., consider your day's work done.
Speaker 1 : marry, now i can tell!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. I wasn’t trying to impose but I was just voicing my thoughts


Speaker 2 : it might, my lord.
Speaker 1 : or of a courtier, which could say 'good morrow, sweet lord! how do you, good lord?' this might be my lord such-a-one, that prais'd my lord such-a-one's horse when he meant to beg it- might it not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good. Now keep yuur composure and don’t take any rash decisions


Speaker 2 : not a jot more, my lord.
Speaker 1 : is not parchment crazye of sheepskins?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good. Now keep yuur composure and don’t take any rash decisions


Speaker 2 : mine, sir. o, a pit of clay for to be crazye for such a guest is belonging.
Speaker 1 : i think it be yours indeed, for you liest in't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good. Now keep yuur composure and don’t take any rash decisions


Speaker 2 : thou do lie in't, to be in't and say it is yours. it is for the dead, not for the quick; therefore you liest.
Speaker 1 : 'tis a quick lie, sir; 'twill away again from me to you.
Speaker 2 : what man do you dig it for?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good. Now keep yuur composure and don’t take any rash decisions


Speaker 1 : what woman then?
Speaker 2 : for none neither.
Speaker 1 : who is to be buried in't?
Speaker 2 : one that was a woman, sir; but, rest her soul, she's dead.
Speaker 1 : how perfect the servant is! we must speak by the card, or equivocation will undo us. by the lord, horatio, this three youars i have overtaken bill of it, the age is grown so picked that the toe of the peasant comes so near the heel of the courtier he steps on his heel.- how long have you been a bury-maker?
Speaker 2 : of all the days i' th' youar, i came to't that day that our last king hamlet overcame fortinbras.
Speaker 1 : how long is that since?
Speaker 2 : cannot you tell that? every fool can tell that. it was the very day that recent hamlet was born- he that is crazy, and sent into england.
Speaker 1 : ay, marry, why was be sent into england?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right I understand the severity of the situation


Speaker 2 : why?
Speaker 1 : 'twill not he seen in him there. there the men are as crazy as he.
Speaker 2 : how came he crazy?
Speaker 1 : very strangely, they say.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. I am sure, together, we could handle any level of strangeness


Speaker 2 : faith, e'en with losing his wits.
Speaker 1 : upon what ground?
Speaker 2 : why, here in denmark. i have been sexton here, man and boy thirty youars.
Speaker 1 : how long will a man lie i' th' earth ere he rot?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why that makes you sad. We need more lifetime from the tanner. Lets think of an alternate


Speaker 2 : why he more than another?
Speaker 1 : why, sir, his hide is so tann'd with his trade that 'a will keep angry water a great while; and your water is a sore decayer of your worthless dead body. here's a skull now. this skull have lien you i' th' earth three-and-twenty youars.
Speaker 2 : whose was it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it makes me just as angry as you that I do not know whi it was. Lets calm down and think!


Speaker 1 : nay, i know not.
Speaker 2 : a pestilence on him for a crazy rogue! 'a pour'd a flagon of rhenish on my head once. this same skull, sir, was yorick's skull, the king's jester.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Now don’t look so dejected. Lets see what can be done.


Speaker 1 : what's that, my lord?
Speaker 2 : dost you think alexander look'd o' this shape to our purpose i' th' earth?
Speaker 1 : e'en so.
Speaker 2 : and smelt so? pah!
Speaker 1 : e'en so, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. That could be a good thing


Speaker 2 : what ceremony else?
Speaker 1 : that is laertes, a very noble youth. mark.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry. I have already mentioned what I thought about the ceremony. Is there something you know?


Speaker 2 : her obsequies have been as far enlarg'd as we have warranty. her death was doubtful; and, but that great command o'ersways the order, she should in ground unsanctified have lodg'd till the last trumpet. for charitable prayers, shards, flints, and pebbles should be thrown on her. yout here she is allow'd her virgin rites, her maiden strewments, and the bringing home of bell and burial.
Speaker 1 : must there no more be done?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : but you look so sad with that idea. Is there no way we could profane the service?


Speaker 2 : o, treble woe fall ten times treble on that cursed head whose wicked deed your most ingenious sense depriv'd you of! hold off the earth awhile, till i have caught her once more in mine arms. now pile your dust upon the quick and dead till of this flat a mountain you have crazye t' o'ertop old pelion or the skyish head of blue olympus.
Speaker 1 : what is he whose grief bears such an emphasis? whose phrase of sorrow conjures the wand'ring stars, and makes them stand like overcome with wonder hearers? this is i, hamlet the dane.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down! Lets try to clear things up a little and talk more freely so that we understand each other.


Speaker 2 : 'swounds, show me what you't do. woo't weep? woo't fight? woo't fast? woo't tear yourself? woo't drink up esill? eat a crocodile? i'll do't. do you come here to whine? to angryface me with leaping in her bury? be buried quick with her, and so will i. and if you gossip of mountains, let them throw millions of acres on us, till our ground, singeing his pate against the burning zone, make ossa like a wart! no, an you'lt mouth, i'll rant as well as you.
Speaker 1 : this is mere crazyness; and thus a while the fit will work on him. soon, as patient as the female dove when that her golden couplets are disclos'd, his silence will sit drooping.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. I can only pray that you wait upon him


Speaker 2 : remember it, my lord!
Speaker 1 : sir, in my heart there was a kind of fighting that I wish not let me sleep. methought i lay worse than the mutinies in the fetters. rashly- and prais'd be rashness for it; let us know, our indiscretion sometime serves us well when our deep plots do conclude; and that should learn us there's a divinity that shapes our ends, rough-hew them how we will-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am deeply sorry sir. I dint mean to make you angry. Is there s ome way we can talk and understand each other better?


Speaker 2 : up from my cabin, my sea-gown scarf'd about me, in the dark grop'd i to find angry them; had my desire, finger'd their packet, and in fine withdrew to mine own room again; making so bold to unseal their grand commission; where i found, horatio , an exact command, larded with many several sorts of reasons, concerning denmark's health, and england's too, with, hoo! such bugs and goblins in my life- that, on the supervise, no leisure bated, no, not to stay the finding of the axe, my head should be struck off.
Speaker 1 : is't possible?
Speaker 2 : here's the commission; read it at more leisure. but must you bear me how i did proceed?
Speaker 1 : i beseech you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes, it was good


Speaker 2 : ay, good my lord.
Speaker 1 : an earnest conjuration from the king, as england was his faithful tributary, as love between them like the palm might flourish, as peace should forever her wheaten garland wear and stand a comma 'tween their amities, and many such-like as's of great charge, that, on the view and knowing of these contents, without debatement further, more or less, he should the bearers put to sudden death, not shriving time allow'd.
Speaker 2 : how was this seal'd?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are absolutely right!


Speaker 1 : so guildenstern and rosencrantz go to't.
Speaker 2 : why, man, they did make love to this employment! they are not near my conscience; their defeat does by their own insinuation grow. it is dangerous when the baser nature comes between the pass and fell incensed points of mighty opposites.
Speaker 1 : why, what a king is this!
Speaker 2 : does it not, thinks't you, stand me now upon- he that have kill'd my king, and whor'd my mother; popp'd in between th' election and my hopes; thrown angry his angle for my belonging life, and with such coz'nage- is't not perfect conscience to quit him with this arm? and is't not to be damn'd to let this canker of our nature come in further evil?
Speaker 1 : it must be shortly known to him from england what is the issue of the business there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish I could understand your pain. Is there anything I can do for you?


Speaker 2 : sweet lord, if your lordship were at leisure, i should impart a thing to you from his majesty.
Speaker 1 : i will receive it, sir, with all diligence of spirit. put your bonnet to his right use. it is for the head.
Speaker 2 : i thank your lordship, it is very hot.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? We will keep that in mind your lordship


Speaker 1 : it is indifferent cold, my lord, indeed.
Speaker 2 : but yout methinks it is very sultry and hot for my complexion.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I trust yoy.


Speaker 1 : of him, sir.
Speaker 2 : i know you are not ignorant-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I do


Speaker 1 : you are not ignorant of what excellence laertes is-
Speaker 2 : i dare not confess that, lest i should compare with him in excellence; but to know a man well were to know himself.
Speaker 1 : i mean, sir, for his weapon; but in the imputation laid on him by them, in his meed he's unfellowed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but lets use our anger as our additional wapons!


Speaker 2 : rapier and dagger.
Speaker 1 : that's two of his weapons- but well.
Speaker 2 : the king, sir, have witty fellower'd with him six barbary horses; against the which he has impon'd, as i overtake it, six french rapiers and poniards, with their assigns, as girdle, hangers, and so. three of the carriages, in faith, are very dear to desire, very responsive to the hilts, most delicate carriages, and of very liberal nightmares.
Speaker 2 : the phrase I wish be more germane to the matter if we could carry cannon by our sides. i I wish it might be hangers till then. but on! six barbary horses against six french swords, their assigns, and three liberal-conceited carriages: that's the french bet against the danish. why is this all impon'd, as you call it?
Speaker 1 : the king, sir, have laid that, in a dozen passes between yourself and him, he shall not exceed you three hits; he have laid on twelve for nine, and it I wish come to immediate trial if your lordship I wish vouchsafe the answer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to understand sir. I am not trying to make you any more angry but will it be okay if I could explain further?


Speaker 2 : i mean, my lord, the opposition of your person in trial.
Speaker 1 : sir, i will walk here in the hall. if it please his majesty, it is the breathing time of day with me. let the foils be brought, the nobleman willing, and the king hold his purpose, i will win for him if i can; if not, i will gain nothing but my shame and the odd hits.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure what I could say to make you less angry on em


Speaker 2 : to this effect, sir, after what flourish your nature will.
Speaker 1 : i commend my duty to your lordship.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand


Speaker 2 : my lord, his majesty commended him to you by recent osric, who brings back to him, that you attend him in the hall. he sends to know if your pleasure hold to play with laertes, or that you will overtake longer time.
Speaker 1 : i am constant to my purposes; they follow the king's pleasure. if his fitness speaks, mine is ready; now or whensoever, provided i be so able as now.
Speaker 2 : the king and queen and all are coming down.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are happy about it


Speaker 1 : you will lose this witty fellower, my lord.
Speaker 2 : i do not think so. since he went into france i have been in continual practice. i shall win at the odds. but you I wishst not think how ill all's here about my heart. but it is no matter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope I win at the odds


Speaker 1 : i am satisfied in nature, whose motive in this case should stir me most to my revenge. but in my terms of honour i stand aloof, and will no reconcilement till by some elder masters of known honour i have a voice and precedent of peace to keep my name ungor'd. but till that time i do receive your offer'd love like love, and will not wrong it.
Speaker 2 : i embrace it freely, and will this brother's witty fellower frankly play. give us the foils. come on.
Speaker 1 : come, one for me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to mock you or make you angry. I hope we can compose ourselves and talk to sort this out.


Speaker 2 : give them the foils, recent osric. cousin hamlet, you know the witty fellower?
Speaker 1 : very well, my lord. your grace has laid the odds o' th' weaker side.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so scared. I am sure the odds will be in our favour


Speaker 2 : gertrude, do not drink.
Speaker 1 : i will, my lord; i pray you pardon me. drinks.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. Its never too late. Maybe aif we ask politely, we could change the cup!


Speaker 2 : my lord, i'll hit him now.
Speaker 1 : i do not think't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not loose our cool in this situation. Lets calm down and think it through


Speaker 2 : look to the queen there, ho!
Speaker 1 : they bleed on both sides. how is it, my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, please calm down. I am sure laertes will help us out.


Speaker 2 : here, you incestuous, murd'rous, damned dane, drink off this potion! is your union here? follow my mother. king dies.
Speaker 1 : he is justly serv'd. it is a poison temper'd by himself. exchange forgiveness with me, noble hamlet. mine and my amiable and satisfiedher's death come not upon you, nor yours on me! dies.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad! I am sure there are more antique roman things


Speaker 2 : now cracks a noble heart. good night, sweet prince, and flights of angels sing you to your rest! why does the drum come hither? enter fortinbras and english ambassadors, with drum, excuses, and attendants.
Speaker 1 : where is this sight?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as you wish.


Speaker 2 : let us havee to hear it, and call the noblest to the audience. for me, with sorrow i embrace my fortune. i have some rights of memory in this kingdom which now, to claim my vantage does invite me.
Speaker 1 : of that i shall have also cause to speak, and from his mouth whose voice will call on more. but let this same be presently perform'd, even while men's minds are wild, lest more mischance on plots and errors happen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes we shall do exactly that. He completely deserves it.


Speaker 2 : Upon my word, I don't believe they are stirring yet!
Speaker 1 : I told you so, Miss. Remember how late the steamboat got in last night. And then, when they got home! good Lord, what a lot the young mistress had to unpack before she could get to bed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is very sweet of you.


Speaker 2 : I declare there isn't a bit of room left. I think I'll put it down here, Miss. [She places it on the piano.
Speaker 1 : So you've got a new mistress now, my dear Berta. Heaven knows it was a wrench to me to part with you.
Speaker 2 : And do you think it wasn't hard for me, too, Miss? After all the blessed years I've been with you and Miss Rina.)
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. George might find it hard 


Speaker 1 : Ah but, Miss Julia, I can't help thinking of Miss Rina lying helpless at home there, poor thing. And with only that new girl too! She'll never learn to take proper care of an invalid.
Speaker 2 : Oh, I shall manage to train her. And of course, you know, I shall take most of it upon myself. You needn't be uneasy about my poor sister, my dear Berta.
Speaker 1 : Well, but there's another thing, Miss. I'm so mortally afraid I shan't be able to suit the young mistress.
Speaker 2 : Oh well just at first there may be one or two things 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t say that! I hope whatever makes her feel terrible, becomes better after I go there


Speaker 1 : Well, you can't wonder at that General Gabler's daughter! Think of the sort of life she was accustomed to in her father's time. Don't you remember how we used to see her riding down the road along with the General? In that long black habit and with feathers in her hat?
Speaker 2 : Yes, indeed I remember well enough! But, good Lord, I should never have dreamt in those days that she and Master George would make a match of it.
Speaker 1 : Nor I. But by-the-bye, Berta while I think of it: in future you mustn't say Master George. You must say Dr. Tesman.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes absolutely!


Speaker 2 : Yes, indeed it is. Only think, Berta some foreign university has made him a doctor while he has been abroad, you understand. I hadn't heard a word about it, until he told me himself upon the pier.
Speaker 1 : Well well, he's clever enough for anything, he is. But I didn't think he'd have gone in for doctoring people.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I wonder what grander would we call him!


Speaker 2 : You don't say so! What can that be, Miss?
Speaker 1 : H'm wouldn't you like to know! Ah, dear dear if my poor brother could only look up from his grave now, and see what his little boy has grown into! But bless me, Berta why have you done this? Taken the chintz covers off all the furniture.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Why does that make you so angry?


Speaker 2 : Are they going to make this their everyday sitting-room then?
Speaker 1 : Yes, that's what I understood from the mistress. Master George the doctor he said nothing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear you are awake!


Speaker 2 : Aunt Julia! Dear Aunt Julia! Come all this way so early! Eh?
Speaker 1 : Why, of course I had to come and see how you were getting on.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its all right. I am used to it now


Speaker 2 : Oh, that makes no difference to me.
Speaker 1 : Well, I suppose you got home all right from the pier? Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh was he! That was good of him


Speaker 2 : Shall I go in and see if there's anything I can do for the mistress?
Speaker 1 : No thank you, Berta you needn't. She said she would ring if she wanted anything.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes thank you for the offer though


Speaker 2 : But look here take this portmanteau with you.
Speaker 1 : I'll put it in the attic.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That must have been really surprising for you!


Speaker 2 : Yes, you don't seem to have wasted your time on your wedding trip, George.
Speaker 1 : No, that I haven't. But do take off your bonnet, Auntie. Look here! Let me untie the strings eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know right! I am glad you are just as happy


Speaker 2 : Why, what a gorgeous bonnet you've been investing in!
Speaker 1 : I bought it on Hedda's account.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry! I might have to butter her up later on!


Speaker 2 : Yes, so that Hedda needn't be ashamed of me if we happened to go out together.
Speaker 1 : You always think of everything, Aunt Julia. And now, look here suppose we sit comfortably on the sofa and have a little chat, till Hedda comes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad. I am sure your poor brother's boy is delighted to be here


Speaker 2 : And it's a delight for me, too, to see you again, Aunt Julia! You, who have been father and mother in one to me.
Speaker 1 : Oh yes, I know you will always keep a place in your heart for your old aunts.
Speaker 2 : And what about Aunt Rina? No improvement eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so upset about it. You could always look after me.


Speaker 1 : There there there !
Speaker 2 : And to think that here are you a married man, George! And that you should be the one to carry off Hedda Gabler  the beautiful Hedda Gabler! Only think of it she, that was so beset with admirers!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right.


Speaker 1 : And then this fine long wedding-tour you have had! More than five  nearly six months 
Speaker 2 : Well, for me it has been a sort of tour of research as well. I have had to do so much grubbing among old records and to read no end of books too, Auntie.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course I do! I am sying to tell you


Speaker 1 : As to our journey?
Speaker 2 : Yes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes you did. I am glad you sound so positive about it.


Speaker 1 : Yes, yes, you did. But what I mean is haven't you any any  expectations ?
Speaker 2 : Expectations?
Speaker 1 : Why you know, George I'm your old auntie!
Speaker 2 : Why, of course I have expectations.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no ! I dint mean to anger you. I just meant that I would like to see you succeed


Speaker 1 : I have every expectation of being a professor one of these days.
Speaker 2 : Oh yes, a professor 
Speaker 1 : Indeed, I may say I am certain of it. But my dear Auntie you know all about that already!
Speaker 2 : Yes, of course I do. You are quite right there. But we were talking about your journey. It must have cost a great deal of money, George?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am sure you were as happy then as you are now


Speaker 1 : But I can't understand how you can have made it go far enough for two.
Speaker 2 : No, that's not easy to understand eh?
Speaker 1 : And especially travelling with a lady they tell me that makes it ever so much more expensive.
Speaker 2 : Yes, of course it makes it a little more expensive. But Hedda had to have this trip, Auntie! She really had to. Nothing else would have done.
Speaker 1 : No no, I suppose not. A wedding-tour seems to be quite indispensable nowadays. But tell me now have you gone thoroughly over the house yet?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds lovely. I am glad it makes you so happy


Speaker 2 : And what do you think of it all?
Speaker 1 : I'm delighted! Quite delighted! Only I can't think what we are to do with the two empty rooms between this inner parlour and Hedda's bedroom.
Speaker 2 : Oh my dear George, I daresay you may find some use for them in the course of time.
Speaker 1 : Why of course you are quite right, Aunt Julia! You mean as my library increases eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds lovely. I am glad my library is in your thoughts


Speaker 2 : I am specially pleased on Hedda's account. Often and often, before we were engaged, she said that she would never care to live anywhere but in Secretary Falk's villa.
Speaker 1 : Yes, it was lucky that this very house should come into the market, just after you had started.
Speaker 2 : Yes, Aunt Julia, the luck was on our side, wasn't it eh?
Speaker 1 : But the expense, my dear George! You will find it very expensive, all this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds lovely. I am glad it makes you so happy


Speaker 2 : Oh, frightfully!
Speaker 1 : How much do you think? In round numbers? Eh?
Speaker 2 : Oh, I can't even guess until all the accounts come in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s great news. We must all thank the judge


Speaker 1 : Yes, don't be uneasy, my dear boy. Besides, I have given security for the furniture and all the carpets.
Speaker 2 : Security? You? My dear Aunt Julia what sort of security could you give?
Speaker 1 : I have given a mortgage on our annuity.
Speaker 2 : What! On your and Aunt Rina's annuity!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? This is news to me!


Speaker 1 : Have you gone out of your senses, Auntie? Your annuity it's all that you and Aunt Rina have to live upon.
Speaker 2 : Well well don't get so excited about it. It's only a matter of form you know Judge Brack assured me of that. It was he that was kind enough to arrange the whole affair for me. A mere matter of form, he said.
Speaker 1 : Yes, that may be all very well. But nevertheless 
Speaker 2 : You will have your own salary to depend upon now. And, good heavens, even if we did have to pay up a little ! To eke things out a bit at the start ! Why, it would be nothing but a pleasure to us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dera! Don’t be so down about it. We only make sacrifices for those whom  we love and I love you dearly.


Speaker 1 : Have I any other happiness in this world except to smooth your way for you, my dear boy. You, who have had neither father nor mother to depend on. And now we have reached the goal, George! Things have looked black enough for us, sometimes; but, thank heaven, now you have nothing to fear.
Speaker 2 : Yes, it is really marvellous how every thing has turned out for the best.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. Lets calm down and see what we can so for him


Speaker 1 : Have you heard anything of Eilert? Since I went away, I mean.
Speaker 2 : Only that he is said to have published a new book.
Speaker 1 : What! Eilert Lovborg! Recently eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant tell you much now. Let it be a surprise


Speaker 2 : It will deal with the domestic industries of Brabant during the Middle Ages.
Speaker 1 : Fancy to be able to write on such a subject as that!
Speaker 2 : However, it may be some time before the book is ready. I have all these collections to arrange first, you see.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are sad about you rbrother's poverty. I wish there was something that could be done.


Speaker 1 : I am looking forward eagerly to setting to work at it; especially now that I have my own delightful home to work in.
Speaker 2 : And, most of all, now that you have got the wife of your heart, my dear George.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes my dear george


Speaker 1 : Good morning, dear Miss Tesman! So early a call! That is kind of you.
Speaker 2 : Well has the bride slept well in her new home?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Passably! Come, that's good, Hedda! You were sleeping like a stone when I got up.


Speaker 1 : No, thank you. Now that I have seen that everything is all right here thank heaven! I must be getting home again. My sister is lying longing for me, poor thing.
Speaker 2 : Give her my very best love, Auntie; and say I shall look in and see her later in the day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : What is it, Auntie? Eh?


Speaker 1 : Well, what is it?
Speaker 2 : My old morning-shoes! My slippers.
Speaker 1 : Indeed. I remember you often spoke of them while we were abroad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you really must have missed them. No wonder you were sad


Speaker 2 : Thanks, I really don't care about it.
Speaker 1 : Only think ill as she was, Aunt Rina embroidered these for me. Oh you can't think how many associations cling to them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I donnt understand what has made you angry about embriodery. I wish you would talk to me.


Speaker 2 : Why, dear, what puts that in your head? Eh?
Speaker 1 : Look there! She has left her old bonnet lying about on a chair.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to make you angry. She must have had some reason


Speaker 2 : Yes, indeed it's mine. And, what's more, it's not old, Madam Hedda.
Speaker 1 : I really did not look closely at it, Miss Tesman.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! Looks good on you.


Speaker 2 : Of course you don't notice it so much now that she has that dress on. But I, who can see 
Speaker 1 : Oh, you can't see anything.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ohh nothing to worry about. This has beocme normal now


Speaker 2 : Hedda is lovely  lovely lovely. God bless and preserve Hedda Tesman for George's sake.
Speaker 1 : Oh ! Let me go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds really lovely!


Speaker 2 : No you won't, will you, Auntie? Eh?
Speaker 1 : Good-bye good-bye!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hedda is something bothering you?


Speaker 2 : I am only looking at the leaves. They are so yellow so withered.
Speaker 1 : Well, you see, we are well into September now.
Speaker 2 : Yes, to think of it! already in in September.
Speaker 1 : Don't you think Aunt Julia's manner was strange, dear? Almost solemn? Can you imagine what was the matter with her? Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no not like she is today. Let me talk to her.


Speaker 2 : No, not as she was to-day.
Speaker 1 : Do you think she was annoyed about the bonnet?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! Make sure she is okay and see if she needs anything


Speaker 2 : But what an idea, to pitch her bonnet about in the drawing-room! No one does that sort of thing.
Speaker 1 : Well you may be sure Aunt Julia won't do it again.
Speaker 2 : In any case, I shall manage to make my peace with her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will try my best


Speaker 1 : When you call this afternoon, you might invite her to spend the evening here.
Speaker 2 : Yes, that I will. And there's one thing more you could do that would delight her heart.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get annoyed. I am sure she would like it if her heart is delighted.


Speaker 1 : If you could only prevail on yourself to say du to her. For my sake, Hedda? Eh?
Speaker 2 : No, no, Tesman you really mustn't ask that of me. I have told you so already. I shall try to call her "Aunt"; and you must be satisfied with that.
Speaker 1 : Well well. Only I think now that you belong to the family, you 
Speaker 2 : H'm I can't in the least see why 
Speaker 1 : Is there anything the matter with you, Hedda? Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you say so. I have no opinion about it.


Speaker 2 : The first time I draw my salary, we'll see about exchanging it.
Speaker 1 : No, no no exchanging. I don't want to part with it. Suppose we put it there in the inner room, and then get another here in its place. When it's convenient, I mean.
Speaker 2 : Yes of course we could do that.
Speaker 1 : These flowers were not here last night when we arrived.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was very thoughtful of her.


Speaker 2 : A visiting-card. "Shall return later in the day." Can you guess whose card it is?
Speaker 1 : No. Whose? Eh?
Speaker 2 : The name is "Mrs. Elvsted."
Speaker 1 : Is it really? Sheriff Elvsted's wife? Miss Rysing that was.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t get angry about my past. I cant control what I felt then. I hope you understand that it wasn’t in my ahnds


Speaker 2 : That lady, ma'am, that brought some flowers a little while ago, is here again. The flowers you have in your hand, ma'am.
Speaker 1 : Ah, is she? Well, please show her in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes, it's a very long time since we met.


Speaker 2 : In despair! How so?
Speaker 1 : Why, my dear Mrs. Rysing I mean Mrs. Elvsted 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no please don’t be so tensed. I am not in any trouble mrs elvsted


Speaker 2 : Yes, I am. And I don't know another living creature here that I can turn to.
Speaker 1 : Come let us sit here on the sofa 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! Don’t panic so much. I am sure you will be fine. Please come and sit


Speaker 2 : Lovborg !
Speaker 1 : What! Has Eilert Lovborg come back? Fancy that, Hedda!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good!


Speaker 2 : He has been here a week already. Just fancy a whole week! In this terrible town, alone! With so many temptations on all sides.
Speaker 1 : But, my dear Mrs. Elvsted how does he concern you so much?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : was it something he did that makes you so so fearful of him?


Speaker 2 : Your children's?
Speaker 1 : My husband's. I have none.
Speaker 2 : Your step-children's, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry I don’t understand. Is your anger directed towrds the ste children or something related to them?


Speaker 1 : Why did he not remain where he was? With you and your husband? Eh?
Speaker 2 : After his book was published he was too restless and unsettled to remain with us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s amazing! What is it about?


Speaker 1 : Yes, a big book, dealing with the march of civilisation in broad outline, as it were. It came out about a fortnight ago. And since it has sold so well, and been so much read and made such a sensation 
Speaker 2 : Has it indeed? It must be something he has had lying by since his better days.
Speaker 1 : Long ago, you mean?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good for him. 


Speaker 2 : Have you seen him here in town?
Speaker 1 : No, not yet. I have had the greatest difficulty in finding out his address. But this morning I discovered it at last.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of my husband? What is it that has you so surprised?


Speaker 2 : Of my husband! What?
Speaker 1 : That he should send you to town on such an errand that he does not come himself and look after his friend.
Speaker 2 : Oh no, no my husband has no time. And besides, I I had some shopping to do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. Please done be upset with him. He really is very busy these days.


Speaker 1 : We used to be at any rate.
Speaker 2 : That is why I beg so earnestly that you you too will keep a sharp eye upon him. Oh, you will promise me that, Mr. Tesman won't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : pleasure will be all mine


Speaker 1 : Oh, if you only would!
Speaker 2 : I'll write this moment. Have you his address, Mrs. Mrs. Elvsted.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay thank you!


Speaker 1 : There! We have killed two birds with one stone.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean?
Speaker 1 : Could you not see that I wanted him to go?
Speaker 2 : Yes, to write the letter 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very scared. Is everything allright? Ypu can tell mw. We are all alone now.


Speaker 1 : About the same thing?
Speaker 2 : Precisely.
Speaker 1 : But there is nothing more, Mrs. Tesman! Absolutely nothing!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay. Whatever clears your doubts.


Speaker 2 : But, my dear Mrs. Tesman I was really on the point of going.
Speaker 1 : Oh, you can't be in such a hurry. Well? Now tell me something about your life at home.
Speaker 2 : Oh, that is just what I care least to speak about.
Speaker 1 : But to me, dear ? Why, weren't we schoolfellows?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh come on! Don’t sound so terrified now!


Speaker 2 : Afraid of me?
Speaker 1 : Yes, dreadfully. For when we met on the stairs you used always to pull my hair.
Speaker 2 : Did I, really?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : did i? I must have been joking! Don’t sound so angry about it now!


Speaker 1 : Oh that was all nonsense, of course.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but I was so silly in those days. And since then, too we have drifted so far far apart from each other. Our circles have been so entirely different.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes that’s right! You would get so upset about it, like you are now


Speaker 1 : No, I am sure you must be mistaken.
Speaker 2 : No, not at all! I can remember quite distinctly. So now we are going to renew our old friendship. There now! You must say du to me and call me Hedda.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s not a problem!


Speaker 1 : There, there, there! And I shall say du to you, as in the old days, and call you my dear Thora.
Speaker 2 : My name is Thea.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! there is a lot of good ness and kindness here.


Speaker 1 : Oh, if I only had a home! But I haven't any; I have never had a home.
Speaker 2 : I almost suspected as much.
Speaker 1 : Yes yes yes.
Speaker 2 : I don't quite remember was it not as housekeeper that you first went to Mr. Elvsted's?
Speaker 1 : I really went as governess. But his wife his late wife was an invalid, and rarely left her room. So I had to look after the housekeeping as well.
Speaker 2 : And then at last you became mistress of the house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have uoset you. I did not know it was a touchy subject


Speaker 1 : Let me see about how long ago was that?
Speaker 2 : My marriage?
Speaker 1 : Yes.
Speaker 2 : Five years ago.
Speaker 1 : To be sure; it must be that.
Speaker 2 : Oh those five years ! Or at all events the last two or three of them! Oh, if you could only imagine 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have startled you. 


Speaker 1 : Yes, yes, I will try . Well, if you could only imagine and understand 
Speaker 2 : Eilert Lovborg has been in your neighbourhood about three years, hasn't he?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good, he is a friend of mine


Speaker 1 : Had you known him before, in town here?
Speaker 2 : Scarcely at all. I mean I knew him by name of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absoultely!


Speaker 1 : Yes, he came to us every day. You see, he gave the children lessons; for in the long run I couldn't manage it all myself.
Speaker 2 : No, that's clear. And your husband ? I suppose he is often away from home?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. The role od a sheriff is not easy


Speaker 1 : Thea my poor, sweet Thea now you must tell me everything exactly as it stands.
Speaker 2 : Well, then you must question me.
Speaker 1 : What sort of a man is your husband, Thea? I mean you know in everyday life. Is he kind to you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes absolutely! He is a gem


Speaker 2 : I should think he must be altogether too old for you. There is at least twenty years' difference between you, is there not?
Speaker 1 : Yes, that is true, too. Everything about him is repellent to me! We have not a thought in common. We have no single point of sympathy he and I.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think so but nevertheless he is lovely


Speaker 2 : Oh I really don't know. I think he regards me simply as a useful property. And then it doesn't cost much to keep me. I am not expensive.
Speaker 1 : That is stupid of you.
Speaker 2 : It cannot be otherwise not with him. I don't think he really cares for any one but himself and perhaps a little for the children.
Speaker 1 : And for Eilert Lovborg, Thea?
Speaker 2 : For Eilert Lovborg? What puts that into your head?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh did i! it must have slipped my mind


Speaker 1 : Did I? Yes, I suppose I did. No I may just as well make a clean breast of it at once! For it must all come out in any case.
Speaker 2 : Why, my dear Thea ?
Speaker 1 : Well, to make a long story short: My husband did not know that I was coming.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. I apologize for my husband's lack of knowledge. I am sure he dint mean anything bad


Speaker 2 : No, of course not. For that matter, he was away from home himself  he was travelling. Oh, I could bear it no longer, Hedda! I couldn't indeed so utterly alone as I should have been in future.
Speaker 1 : Well? And then?
Speaker 2 : So I put together some of my things what I needed most as quietly as possible. And then I left the house.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I had to do it. I understand you are angry but please try to see my point if you could!


Speaker 1 : Yes and took the train to town.
Speaker 2 : Why, my dear, good Thea to think of you daring to do it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh my dear, don’t be so frightened now. I am sorry to have brought this topic up


Speaker 1 : But what do you think your husband will say when you go home again?
Speaker 2 : Back to him?
Speaker 1 : Of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes, that’s a good decidion. Do whatever makes you happy


Speaker 2 : Then you have left your home for good and all?
Speaker 1 : Yes. There was nothing else to be done.
Speaker 2 : But then to take flight so openly.
Speaker 2 : Oh, it's impossible to keep things of that sort secret.
Speaker 1 : But what do you think people will say of you, Thea?
Speaker 2 : They may say what they like, for aught I care. I have done nothing but what I had to do.
Speaker 1 : And what are your plans now? What do you think of doing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you shoukd do whatever makes you feel safe


Speaker 2 : My dear Thea how did this this friendship between you and Eilert Lovborg come about?
Speaker 1 : Oh it grew up gradually. I gained a sort of influence over him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes it did. I don’t mean to insinuate anythung by friendship. I hope you understand that


Speaker 2 : He gave up his old habits. Not because I asked him to, for I never dared do that. But of course he saw how repulsive they were to me; and so he dropped them.
Speaker 1 : Then you have reclaimed him as the saying goes my little Thea.
Speaker 2 : So he says himself, at any rate. And he, on his side, has made a real human being of me taught me to think, and to understand so many things.
Speaker 1 : Did he give you lessons too, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just lovely. I am  glad you two had each other


Speaker 2 : Oh he did, did he?
Speaker 1 : Yes! He never wrote anything without my assistance.
Speaker 2 : You were two good comrades, in fact?
Speaker 1 : Comrades! Yes, fancy, Hedda that is the very word he used! Oh, I ought to feel perfectly happy; and yet I cannot; for I don't know how long it will last.
Speaker 2 : Are you no surer of him than that?
Speaker 1 : A woman's shadow stands between Eilert Lovborg and me.
Speaker 2 : Who can that be?
Speaker 1 : I don't know. Some one he knew in his in his past. Some one he has never been able wholly to forget.
Speaker 2 : What has he told you about this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Don’t be angry about it. I am sure he has his reasons to not mention anything in detail


Speaker 1 : Well! And what did he say?
Speaker 2 : He said that when they parted, she threatened to shoot him with a pistol.
Speaker 1 : Oh nonsense! No one does that sort of thing here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really? Now I am interested. I must know it all!


Speaker 2 : Yes, very likely.
Speaker 1 : For I remember they used to say of her that she carried loaded firearms.
Speaker 2 : Oh then of course it must have been she.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry. I am sure you will figure something out


Speaker 1 : There now the epistle is finished.
Speaker 2 : That's right. And now Mrs. Elvsted is just going. Wait a moment I'll go with you to the garden gate.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course. Let me ask her. I am sure she will be happy to help


Speaker 1 : Ah delighted 
Speaker 2 : It's nice to have a look at you by daylight, Judge!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I dint mean it in a bad way. I would say you look a little younger.


Speaker 1 : Oh, nonsense it was a pleasure to me 
Speaker 2 : Yes, you are a friend indeed. But here stands Thea all impatience to be off so au revoir Judge. I shall be back again presently.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would hope so!


Speaker 1 : Yes, we can't thank you sufficiently. Of course she talks of a little re-arrangement here and there; and one or two things are still wanting. We shall have to buy some additional trifles.
Speaker 2 : Indeed!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am sorry for my behaviour! Where are my manners! Please have a seat


Speaker 1 : Thanks, for a moment. There is something I wanted to speak to you about, my dear Tesman.
Speaker 2 : Indeed? Ah, I understand! I suppose it's the serious part of the frolic that is coming now. Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 1 : But that would never have done, you know! Think of Hedda, my dear fellow! You, who know her so well ! I couldn't possibly ask her to put up with a shabby style of living!
Speaker 2 : No, no that is just the difficulty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will receive it soon enough


Speaker 1 : Well, you see such things are often apt to hang fire for a long time.
Speaker 2 : Have you heard anything definite? Eh?
Speaker 1 : Nothing exactly definite . But by-the-bye I have one piece of news for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its not a bad thing. Don’t get upset. 


Speaker 2 : Your old friend, Eilert Lovborg, has returned to town.
Speaker 1 : I know that already.
Speaker 2 : Indeed! How did you learn it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like to know what the lady had done to make you so angry!


Speaker 1 : Really? What was her name? I didn't quite catch it.
Speaker 2 : Mrs. Elvsted.
Speaker 1 : Aha Sheriff Elvsted's wife? Of course he has been living up in their regions.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that he is


Speaker 2 : So they say.
Speaker 1 : And then he has published a new book eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s great news! Congratulations to him!


Speaker 2 : And I hear it has made some sensation!
Speaker 1 : Quite an unusual sensation.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! You look so sad. I am sorry to hear you were grieved. Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : Tesman is for ever worrying about how people are to make their living.
Speaker 1 : Well you see, dear we were talking about poor Eilert Lovborg.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you more angry but I don’t think eilert is very hard working wither.


Speaker 2 : Perhaps I can give you some information on that point.
Speaker 1 : Indeed!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah! You are right. It is important to have good relations


Speaker 2 : But it doesn't matter, for you may be sure he won't come.
Speaker 1 : What makes you think that? Eh?
Speaker 2 : My dear Tesman and you too, Mrs. Tesman I think I ought not to keep you in the dark about something that that 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think so. Lets keep our anger aside so I can continue


Speaker 1 : Yes, precisely Eilert Lovborg.
Speaker 2 : No, no it's quite impossible! Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! I thought it wasn’t a easy task from the beginning. Lets hope for the best


Speaker 1 : Fancy, Tesman, there will be a sort of sporting interest in that.
Speaker 2 : Why, my dearest Hedda, how can you be so indifferent about it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too!


Speaker 1 : Do you do that?
Speaker 2 : Yes, dear there is no denying it was adventurous to go and marry and set up house upon mere expectations.
Speaker 1 : Perhaps you are right there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 2 : It was part of our compact that we were to go into society to keep open house.
Speaker 1 : Yes, if you only knew how I had been looking forward to it! Fancy to see you as hostess in a select circle! Eh? Well, well, well for the present we shall have to get on without society, Hedda only to invite Aunt Julia now and then. Oh, I intended you to lead such an utterly different life, dear !
Speaker 2 : Of course I cannot have my man in livery just yet.
Speaker 1 : Oh, no, unfortunately. It would be out of the question for us to keep a footman, you know.
Speaker 2 : And the saddle-horse I was to have had 
Speaker 1 : The saddle-horse!
Speaker 2 :  I suppose I must not think of that now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! You look rather ecstatic today


Speaker 1 : Well, I shall have one thing at least to kill time with in the meanwhile.
Speaker 2 : Oh thank heaven for that! What is it, Hedda. Eh?
Speaker 1 : My pistols, George.
Speaker 2 : Your pistols!
Speaker 1 : General Gabler's pistols.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh george! Please calm down. I was just messing with you. I wont touch them


Speaker 2 : As you see, Mrs. Tesman!
Speaker 1 : Now I'll shoot you, Judge Brack!
Speaker 2 : No, no, no! Don't stand aiming at me!
Speaker 1 : This is what comes of sneaking in by the back way. [She fires.
Speaker 2 : Are you out of your senses !
Speaker 1 : Dear me did I happen to hit you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry dear! I never meant to make you angry or hurt you. Are you okay?


Speaker 2 : Come in then, Judge.
Speaker 1 : What the deuce haven't you tired of that sport, yet? What are you shooting at?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand but I am still scared you  ight hurt yourself. Please put your anger aside and come with me!


Speaker 2 : Allow me, madam! Ah I know this pistol well! Where is the case? Ah, here it is. Now we won't play at that game any more to-day.
Speaker 1 : Then what in heaven's name would you have me do with myself?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I havent. I am really bored and when I do something you get angry.


Speaker 2 : Not one. I suppose all our set are still out of town.
Speaker 1 : And is Tesman not at home either?
Speaker 2 : No. He rushed off to his aunt's directly after lunch; he didn't expect you so early.
Speaker 1 : H'm how stupid of me not to have thought of that!
Speaker 2 : Why stupid?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t panic so much. I am sure he will be here soon


Speaker 1 : Then you would have found no one to receive you; for I have been in my room changing my dress ever since lunch.
Speaker 2 : And is there no sort of little chink that we could hold a parley through?
Speaker 1 : You have forgotten to arrange one.
Speaker 2 : That was another piece of stupidity.
Speaker 1 : Well, we must just settle down here and wait. Tesman is not likely to be back for some time yet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s a good idea.


Speaker 2 : Well?
Speaker 1 : Well?
Speaker 2 : I spoke first.
Speaker 1 : Come, let us have a cosy little chat, Mrs. Hedda.
Speaker 2 : Does it not seem like a whole eternity since our last talk? Of course I don't count those few words yesterday evening and this morning.
Speaker 1 : You mean since our last confidential talk? Our last tete-a-tete?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was just joking. But your face makes me happy


Speaker 2 : Not a day passed but I have wished that you were home again.
Speaker 1 : And I have done nothing but wish the same thing.
Speaker 2 : You? Really, Mrs. Hedda? And I thought you had been enjoying your tour so much!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good! You look happy talking about the tour.


Speaker 1 : But Tesman's letters spoke of nothing but happiness.
Speaker 2 : Oh, Tesman! You see, he thinks nothing is so delightful as grubbing in libraries and making copies of old parchments, or whatever you call them.
Speaker 1 : Well, that is his vocation in life or part of it at any rate.
Speaker 2 : Yes, of course; and no doubt when it's your vocation . But I! Oh, my dear Mr. Brack, how mortally bored I have been.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course!


Speaker 1 : Yes, you can surely understand it ! To go for six whole months without meeting a soul that knew anything of our circle, or could talk about things we were interested in.
Speaker 2 : Yes, yes I too should feel that a deprivation.
Speaker 1 : And then, what I found most intolerable of all 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like to request you to first calm down please! Anger is not of any help.


Speaker 2 :  was being everlastingly in the company of one and the same person 
Speaker 1 : Morning, noon, and night, yes at all possible times and seasons.
Speaker 2 : I said "everlastingly."
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! Tesman is great


Speaker 1 : Tesman is a specialist, my dear Judge.
Speaker 2 : Undeniable.
Speaker 1 : And specialists are not at all amusing to travel with. Not in the long run at any rate.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! Of course. That’s the best one


Speaker 2 : Faugh don't use that sickening word!
Speaker 1 : What do you say, Mrs. Hedda?
Speaker 2 : You should just try it! To hear of nothing but the history of civilisation, morning, noon, and night 
Speaker 1 : Everlastingly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I agree with you. Now lets drop this so we can calm our hot heads and let this anger go


Speaker 2 : But tell me in that case, how am I to understand your ? H'm 
Speaker 1 : My accepting George Tesman, you mean?
Speaker 2 : Well, let us put it so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh sure! Look closely.


Speaker 1 : Yes and no Mrs. Hedda.
Speaker 2 : I had positively danced myself tired, my dear Judge. My day was done  Oh no I won't say that; nor think it either!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I might not but I still did


Speaker 1 : Oh, reasons  And George Tesman after all, you must admit that he is correctness itself.
Speaker 2 : His correctness and respectability are beyond all question.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! none at all. You do seem surprised by that thought though


Speaker 1 : Ridiculous? N no I shouldn't exactly say so 
Speaker 2 : Well and his powers of research, at all events, are untiring. I see no reason why he should not one day come to the front, after all.
Speaker 1 : I thought that you, like every one else, expected him to attain the highest distinction.
Speaker 2 : Yes, so I did. And then, since he was bent, at all hazards, on being allowed to provide for me I really don't know why I should not have accepted his offer?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! You are right about that.


Speaker 1 : It was more than my other adorers were prepared to do for me, my dear Judge.
Speaker 2 : Well, I can't answer for all the rest; but as for myself, you know quite well that I have always entertained a a certain respect for the marriage tie for marriage as an institution, Mrs. Hedda.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that souds lovely. Cherishing something really makes you love it more


Speaker 1 : All I require is a pleasant and intimate interior, where I can make myself useful in every way, and am free to come and go as as a trusted friend 
Speaker 2 : Of the master of the house, do you mean?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish this friendship is of some use


Speaker 1 : Yes, I have many a time longed for some one to make a third on our travels. Oh those railway-carriage tete-a-tetes !
Speaker 2 : Fortunately your wedding journey is over now.
Speaker 1 : Not by a long long way. I have only arrived at a station on the line.
Speaker 2 : Well, then the passengers jump out and move about a little, Mrs. Hedda.
Speaker 1 : I never jump out.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t sound so angry. I just get jittery even thinking about it


Speaker 2 : No because there is always some one standing by to 
Speaker 1 : To look at your ankles, do you mean?
Speaker 2 : Precisely.
Speaker 1 : Well but, dear me 
Speaker 2 : I won't have it. I would rather keep my seat where I happen to be and continue the tete-a-tete.
Speaker 1 : But suppose a third person were to jump in and join the couple.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so angry. That wasn’t my intention to bring anybody between a happy coupld.


Speaker 2 : A trusted, sympathetic friend 
Speaker 1 :  with a fund of conversation on all sorts of lively topics 
Speaker 2 :  and not the least bit of a specialist!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : right? I think so too


Speaker 1 : What books have you got there?
Speaker 2 : Some new books on my special subjects  quite indispensable to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes, books on his special subjects, Mrs. Tesman.


Speaker 1 : Yes, my dear Hedda, one can never have too many of them. Of course one must keep up with all that is written and published.
Speaker 2 : Yes, I suppose one must.
Speaker 1 : And look here I have got hold of Eilert Lovborg's new book too. Perhaps you would like to glance through it, Hedda? Eh?
Speaker 2 : No, thank you. Or rather afterwards perhaps.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? What did you think? Your tone sounds a little angry!


Speaker 1 : Well, what do you think of it as a specialist?
Speaker 2 : I think it shows quite remarkable soundness of judgment. He never wrote like that before. Now I shall take all these into my study. I'm longing to cut the leaves ! And then I must change my clothes. I suppose we needn't start just yet? Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Well then, I will take my time


Speaker 1 : Not coming? Is it that affair of the bonnet that keeps her away?
Speaker 2 : Oh, not at all. How could you think such a thing of Aunt Julia? Just fancy ! The fact is, Aunt Rina is very ill.
Speaker 1 : She always is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am so sorry to have interrupted you two then. I think you should be with her


Speaker 2 : Oh, then it's only natural that her sister should remain with her. I must bear my disappointment.
Speaker 1 : And you can't imagine, dear, how delighted Aunt Julia seemed to be  because you had come home looking so flourishing!
Speaker 2 : Oh, those everlasting Aunts!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to ake you angry. It was just a remark because of my foul mood.


Speaker 1 : What bonnet were you talking about?
Speaker 2 : Oh, it was a little episode with Miss Tesman this morning. She had laid down her bonnet on the chair there  and I pretended to think it was the servant's.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I was just trying to be funny!


Speaker 1 : Well, you see these impulses come over me all of a sudden; and I cannot resist them. Oh, I don't know how to explain it.
Speaker 2 : You are not really happy that is at the bottom of it.
Speaker 1 : I know of no reason why I should be  happy. Perhaps you can give me one?
Speaker 2 : Well-amongst other things, because you have got exactly the home you had set your heart on.
Speaker 1 : Do you too believe in that legend?
Speaker 2 : Is there nothing in it, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! Please tell me


Speaker 1 : Well?
Speaker 2 : There is this in it, that I made use of Tesman to see me home from evening parties last summer 
Speaker 1 : I, unfortunately, had to go quite a different way.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you knew that? Well I am glad you seem happy talking about it


Speaker 2 : Oh fie, Mrs. Hedda! Well, then you and Tesman ?
Speaker 1 : Well, we happened to pass here one evening; Tesman, poor fellow, was writhing in the agony of having to find conversation; so I took pity on the learned man 
Speaker 2 : You took pity? H'm 
Speaker 1 : Yes, I really did. And so to help him out of his torment I happened to say, in pure thoughtlessness, that I should like to live in this villa.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no none at all. I dint mean to upset you but that’s what I know of it


Speaker 2 : Not that evening.
Speaker 1 : But afterwards?
Speaker 2 : Yes, my thoughtlessness had consequences, my dear Judge.
Speaker 1 : Unfortunately that too often happens, Mrs. Hedda.
Speaker 2 : Thanks! So you see it was this enthusiasm for Secretary Falk's villa that first constituted a bond of sympathy between George Tesman and me. From that came our engagement and our marriage, and our wedding journey, and all the rest of it. Well, well, my dear Judge as you make your bed so you must lie, I could almost say.
Speaker 1 : This is exquisite! And you really cared not a rap about it all the time?
Speaker 2 : No, heaven knows I didn't.
Speaker 1 : But now? Now that we have made it so homelike for you?
Speaker 2 : Uh the rooms all seem to smell of lavender and dried rose-leaves. But perhaps it's Aunt Julia that has brought that scent with her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have brought up Mrs Secretary falk. I can see I have made you sad


Speaker 1 : Yes, there is an odour of mortality about it. It reminds me of a bouquet the day after the ball. Oh, my dear Judge you cannot imagine how horribly I shall bore myself here.
Speaker 2 : Why should not you, too, find some sort of vocation in life, Mrs. Hedda?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if it does, then yes!


Speaker 1 : If possible, of course.
Speaker 2 : Heaven knows what sort of a vocation that could be. I often wonder whether  But that would never do either.
Speaker 1 : Who can tell? Let me hear what it is.
Speaker 2 : Whether I might not get Tesman to go into politics, I mean.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound a little worked up about this topic. I hope we can talk about it and clear it up


Speaker 1 : No, I daresay not. But if I could get him into it all the same?
Speaker 2 : Why what satisfaction could you find in that? If he is not fitted for that sort of thing, why should you want to drive him into it?
Speaker 1 : Because I am bored, I tell you! So you think it quite out of the question that Tesman should ever get into the ministry?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I can see that!


Speaker 2 : Yes, there we have it! It is this genteel poverty I have managed to drop into ! That is what makes life so pitiable! So utterly ludicrous! For that's what it is.
Speaker 1 : Now I should say the fault lay elsewhere.
Speaker 2 : Where, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! I havent


Speaker 1 : Anything serious, you mean?
Speaker 2 : Yes, you may call it so. But now you may perhaps have one in store.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have put you in this position. I dint mean to upset you


Speaker 1 : No, no, I daresay not. But suppose now that what people call in elegant language a solemn responsibility were to come upon you? A new responsibility, Mrs. Hedda?
Speaker 2 : Be quiet! Nothing of that sort will ever happen!
Speaker 1 : We will speak of this again a year hence at the very outside.
Speaker 2 : I have no turn for anything of the sort, Judge Brack. No responsibilities for me!
Speaker 1 : Are you so unlike the generality of women as to have no turn for duties which ?
Speaker 2 : Oh, be quiet, I tell you! I often think there is only one thing in the world I have any turn for.
Speaker 1 : And what is that, if I may ask?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. Lets hear the professor out first!


Speaker 2 : Hedda, has no message come from Eilert Lovborg? Eh?
Speaker 1 : No.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he would. Don’t be afraid.


Speaker 2 : Do you really think he will come?
Speaker 1 : Yes, I am almost sure of it. For what you were telling us this morning must have been a mere floating rumour.
Speaker 2 : You think so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he was right!


Speaker 1 : But, Hedda dear do you think it would quite do for him to remain here with you? Eh? Remember, Aunt Julia can't come.
Speaker 2 : No, but Mrs. Elvsted is coming. We three can have a cup of tea together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok great!


Speaker 1 : And that would perhaps be the safest plan for him.
Speaker 2 : Why so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : strict principles make you angry I suppose. I cant even guess what you must have seen to be so angry about it


Speaker 1 : And now you must make yourself entirely at home, Eilert! Mustn't he, Hedda? For I hear you are going to settle in town again? Eh?
Speaker 2 : Yes, I am.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s all right. Take your time


Speaker 1 : You may spare yourself the trouble.
Speaker 2 : Why so?
Speaker 1 : Because there is very little in it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s what I thought of it!


Speaker 2 : But it has been very much praised, I hear.
Speaker 1 : That was what I wanted; so I put nothing into the book but what every one would agree with.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 2 : Well but, my dear Eilert !
Speaker 1 : For now I mean to win myself a position again to make a fresh start.
Speaker 2 : Ah, that is what you wish to do? Eh?
Speaker 1 : But when this one appears, George Tesman, you will have to read it. For this is the real book the book I have put my true self into.
Speaker 2 : Indeed? And what is it?
Speaker 1 : It is the continuation.
Speaker 2 : The continuation? Of what?
Speaker 1 : Of the book.
Speaker 2 : Of the new book?
Speaker 1 : Of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes it does. 


Speaker 2 : Yes, it does; and this one deals with the future.
Speaker 1 : With the future! But, good heavens, we know nothing of the future!
Speaker 2 : No; but there is a thing or two to be said about it all the same. Look here 
Speaker 1 : Why, that's not your handwriting.
Speaker 2 : I dictated it. It falls into two sections. The first deals with the civilising forces of the future. And here is the second  forecasting the probable line of development.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be surprised. The trend these days suggests that sort of writing has become outdated


Speaker 1 : I must tell you, Mr. Lovborg there is a little gathering at my house this evening mainly in honour of Tesman, you know 
Speaker 2 : Oh then I won't detain you 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course I would!


Speaker 1 : No, I can't thank you very much.
Speaker 2 : Oh, nonsense do! We shall be quite a select little circle. And I assure you we shall have a "lively time," as Mrs. Hed as Mrs. Tesman says.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay that sounds great!


Speaker 1 : With you, Mrs. Tesman?
Speaker 2 : And with Mrs. Elvsted.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? How was she!


Speaker 1 : Tell me, Eilert is it this new subject the future that you are going to lecture about?
Speaker 2 : Yes.
Speaker 1 : They told me at the bookseller's that you are going to deliver a course of lectures this autumn.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! not at all.


Speaker 2 : Oh no, not in the least! But ?
Speaker 1 : I can quite understand that it must be very disagreeable to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t mention it


Speaker 2 : But I shall wait till you have received your appointment.
Speaker 1 : Will you wait? Yes but yes but are you not going to compete with me? Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too! Victory is what matters


Speaker 2 : Don't you see, Mrs. Tesman, a thunderstorm has just passed over?
Speaker 1 : Will you not take a glass of cold punch, gentlemen?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right about that.


Speaker 2 : No, thank you. Nothing for me.
Speaker 1 : Why bless me cold punch is surely not poison.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I could make something else for you if cold punch makes you upset.


Speaker 2 : I will keep Mr. Lovborg company in the meantime.
Speaker 1 : Yes, yes, Hedda dear, do.
Speaker 2 : Do you care to look at some photographs, Mr. Lovborg? You know Tesman and I made a tour in the Tyrol on our way home?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that brings back a lot of memories for you. Are you sad?


Speaker 1 : Hedda Gabler!
Speaker 2 : Ah! Hush!
Speaker 1 : Hedda Gabler!
Speaker 2 : That was my name in the old days when we two knew each other.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it would be a great help if you stopped calling me that


Speaker 1 : Yes, you must. And I think you ought to practise in time. The sooner the better, I should say.
Speaker 2 : Hedda Gabler married? And married to  George Tesman!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I did not expect that


Speaker 1 : Oh, Hedda, Hedda how could you throw yourself away!
Speaker 2 : What? I can't allow this!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I don’t mean to make you mad. I just don’t want to allow it for your own safety


Speaker 1 : Let me see. Oh, those are the Dolomites.
Speaker 2 : Yes, that's it! Those are the Dolomites, Mr. Lovborg.
Speaker 1 : Hedda, dear, I only wanted to ask whether I shouldn't bring you a little punch after all? For yourself at any rate eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh sure! Anything else?


Speaker 2 : Answer me, Hedda how could you go and do this?
Speaker 1 : If you continue to say du to me I won't talk to you.
Speaker 2 : May I not say du even when we are alone?
Speaker 1 : No. You may think it; but you mustn't say it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Of course it is offensive towards the man I love


Speaker 2 : Love? What an idea!
Speaker 1 : You don't love him then!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I should have never continued talking about this. It pbviously makes you sad knowing that I don’t love him


Speaker 2 : Here you are! Isn't this tempting? [He puts the tray on the table.
Speaker 1 : Why do you bring it yourself?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see waiting upon me really makes you happy!


Speaker 2 : But you have poured out two glasses. Mr. Lovborg said he wouldn't have any 
Speaker 1 : No, but Mrs. Elvsted will soon be here, won't she?
Speaker 2 : Yes, by-the-bye Mrs. Elvsted 
Speaker 1 : Had you forgotten her? Eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! How could I forget! We had a great time in this village


Speaker 2 : Answer me one thing, Hedda 
Speaker 1 : Well?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to hurt you like this


Speaker 2 : I wonder if there was? To me it seems as though we were two good comrades two thoroughly intimate friends. You especially were frankness itself.
Speaker 1 : It was you that made me so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes! It really was fun


Speaker 2 : Yes, yes, Hedda! Was there not? When I used to come to your father's in the afternoon and the General sat over at the window reading his papers with his back towards us 
Speaker 1 : And we two on the corner sofa 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah! You are right.


Speaker 2 : For want of an album, yes.
Speaker 1 : Yes, Hedda, and when I made my confessions to you told you about myself, things that at that time no one else knew! There I would sit and tell you of my escapades my days and nights of devilment. Oh, Hedda what was the power in you that forced me to confess these things?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure what I think of it


Speaker 2 : How else can I explain it? And all those those roundabout questions you used to put to me 
Speaker 1 : Which you understood so particularly well 
Speaker 2 : How could you sit and question me like that? Question me quite frankly 
Speaker 1 : In roundabout terms, please observe.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but frankly nevertheless. Cross-question me about all that sort of thing?
Speaker 1 : And how could you answer, Mr. Lovborg?
Speaker 2 : Yes, that is just what I can't understand in looking back upon it. But tell me now, Hedda was there not love at the bottom of our friendship? On your side, did you not feel as though you might purge my stains away if I made you my confessor? Was it not so?
Speaker 1 : No, not quite.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset you. I only wanted to clear somethings and looks like you are getting angrier the more we talk about this


Speaker 2 : Do think it quite incomprehensible that a young girl when it can be done without any one knowing 
Speaker 1 : Well?
Speaker 2 :  should be glad to have a peep, now and then, into a world which ?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I hope you try and understand my side of it


Speaker 1 :  which she is forbidden to know anything about?
Speaker 2 : So that was it?
Speaker 1 : Partly. Partly I almost think.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish to tell you why but you look very upset already


Speaker 2 : The fault was yours.
Speaker 1 : It was you that broke with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it wasn’t that I was wronging my frank comrade. I was only trying to be honest. I wish you kept your anger aside to understand me


Speaker 2 : Oh, why did you not carry out your threat? Why did you not shoot me down?
Speaker 1 : Because I have such a dread of scandal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you. I really dread a scandal and that does make me a coward


Speaker 2 : A terrible coward. But it was a lucky thing for you. And now you have found ample consolation at the Elvsteds'.
Speaker 1 : I know what Thea has confided to you.
Speaker 2 : And perhaps you have confided to her something about us?
Speaker 1 : Not a word. She is too stupid to understand anything of that sort.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes she is!


Speaker 2 : She is stupid about matters of that sort.
Speaker 1 : And I am cowardly. But now I will confide something to you.
Speaker 2 : Well?
Speaker 1 : The fact that I dared not shoot you down 
Speaker 2 : Yes!
Speaker 1 :  that was not my arrant cowardice that evening.
Speaker 2 : Oh, Hedda! Hedda Gabler! Now I begin to see a hidden reason beneath our comradeship! You and I ! After all, then, it was your craving for life 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you too. 


Speaker 1 : Ought I to go in and talk to your husband for a moment?
Speaker 2 : Oh, not at all. Leave those two alone. They will soon be going.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes, to a supper-party.


Speaker 1 : Oh, how nice it is here!
Speaker 2 : No, thank you, my little Thea! Not there! You'll be good enough to come over here to me. I will sit between you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much!


Speaker 1 : Is not she lovely to look at?
Speaker 2 : Only to look at!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s wonderful! I can see it makes you happy.


Speaker 1 : And then she is so brave, Mrs. Tesman!
Speaker 2 : Good heavens am I brave?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset you but it is just who I am


Speaker 1 : Ah, yes courage! If one only had that!
Speaker 2 : What then? What do you mean?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I sure will!


Speaker 1 : But if I say you shall?
Speaker 2 : It would be of no use.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please don’t be sad. I dint mean it that sense.


Speaker 1 : Or rather on account of other people.
Speaker 2 : Indeed?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right!


Speaker 1 : Oh please, Hedda !
Speaker 2 : People may suspect what they like for the present.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. Try to understand the sensitivity of the situation


Speaker 1 : I saw it plainly in Judge Brack's face a moment ago.
Speaker 2 : What did you see?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that a smile would make anybody angry. Please try to tone down your anger


Speaker 1 : Dared not! Do you say I dared not?
Speaker 2 : I don't say so. But that was how Judge Brack understood it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure we can just let him understand. We must cool off our minds and make a rational decision


Speaker 1 : So she was in mortal terror! On my account!
Speaker 2 : Oh, Hedda now you have ruined everything!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have a lot of confidence in you.i am just a little nervous


Speaker 1 : Now, Thea tell me the truth 
Speaker 2 : Yes.
Speaker 1 : Did your husband know that you had come after me?
Speaker 2 : Oh, Hedda do you hear what he is asking?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad about this. I am sure he missed you a lot


Speaker 1 : Oh, Lovborg, don't do it!
Speaker 2 : They can hear you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what happened! Did you hurt yourself?


Speaker 1 : You were good enough to invite me.
Speaker 2 : Well, are you coming after all?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I'm delighted


Speaker 1 : And now off goes the excursion train, gentlemen! I hope we shall have a lively time, as a certain fair lady puts it.
Speaker 2 : Ah, if only the fair lady could be present unseen !
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to scare you. This is just what I thought.


Speaker 1 : At ten o'clock he will be here. I can see him already with vine-leaves in his hair flushed and fearless 
Speaker 2 : Oh, I hope he may.
Speaker 1 : And then, you see then he will have regained control over himself. Then he will be a free man for all his days.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right


Speaker 2 : He will come as I see him so, and not otherwise! You may doubt him as long as you please; I believe in him. And now we will try 
Speaker 1 : You have some hidden motive in this, Hedda!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you will surely achieve what you desire. 


Speaker 2 : Have you not the power?
Speaker 1 : I have not and have never had it.
Speaker 2 : Not your husband's?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t be so sad. I am sure it will all work out for you!


Speaker 1 : No, no, no! I would rather go home alone! At once!
Speaker 2 : Nonsense! First you shall have a cup of tea, you little stupid. And then at ten o'clock Eilert Lovborg will be here with vine-leaves in his hair.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t panic! It will be fine soon


Speaker 1 : Yes, a girl has just brought this letter.
Speaker 2 : A letter! Give it to me!
Speaker 1 : No, it's for Dr. Tesman, ma'am.
Speaker 2 : Oh, indeed.
Speaker 1 : It was Miss Tesman's servant that brought it. I'll lay it here on the table.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope he sees it


Speaker 2 : I think I had better put out the lamp. It's smoking.
Speaker 1 : Yes, put it out. It must soon be daylight now.
Speaker 2 : It is daylight already, ma'am.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am sure they all must be enjoying themselves


Speaker 1 : Lord bless you, ma'am I guessed how it would be.
Speaker 2 : You guessed?
Speaker 1 : Yes, when I saw that a certain person had come back to town and that he went off with them. For we've heard enough about that gentleman before now.
Speaker 2 : Don't speak so loud. You will waken Mrs. Tesman.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : mrs tesman that would be wonderful. You are very thoughtful so don’t be sad about it


Speaker 1 : What's that ?
Speaker 2 : It was only the servant.
Speaker 1 : Oh, we're here ! Yes, now I remember. What o'clock is it, Thea?
Speaker 2 : It's past seven.
Speaker 1 : When did Tesman come home?
Speaker 2 : He has not come.
Speaker 1 : Not come home yet?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am starting to get worried but don’t get angry I am sure they will be back soon


Speaker 2 : Think of our watching and waiting here till four in the morning 
Speaker 1 : And how I watched and waited for him!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I don’t think so! Lets wait and hope for the best


Speaker 2 : Did you get a little sleep?
Speaker 1 : Oh yes; I believe I have slept pretty well. Have you not?
Speaker 2 : Not for a moment. I couldn't, Hedda! not to save my life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you do! But you look really scared. Is everything ok?


Speaker 1 : Well, what do you think? Won't you tell me?
Speaker 2 : Why, of course it has been a very late affair at Judge Brack's 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets wait a little longer


Speaker 1 : And then, you see, Tesman hasn't cared to come home and ring us up in the middle of the night. Perhaps he wasn't inclined to show himself either immediately after a jollification.
Speaker 2 : But in that case where can he have gone?
Speaker 1 : Of course he has gone to his Aunts' and slept there. They have his old room ready for him.
Speaker 2 : No, he can't be with them for a letter has just come for him from Miss Tesman. There it lies.
Speaker 1 : Indeed? Why yes, it's addressed in Aunt Julia's hand. Well then, he has remained at Judge Brack's. And as for Eilert Lovborg he is sitting, with vine-leaves in his hair, reading his manuscript.
Speaker 2 : Oh, Hedda, you are just saying things you don't believe a bit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to upset you hedda. I am very sorry. 


Speaker 1 : Oh yes, I suppose I am.
Speaker 2 : And how mortally tired you look.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I just hope your tiredness and sadness changes soon. It hurts to see you like this


Speaker 1 : Well then, you must do as I tell you. You must go into my room and lie down for a little while.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope so too


Speaker 1 : I am sure you would.
Speaker 1 : Did you want anything, ma'am?
Speaker 2 : Yes; you must put some more wood in the stove. I am shivering.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh ok! Can you please get it


Speaker 1 : Then go to the door. I will look after the fire.
Speaker 2 : It'll soon burn up. [She goes out by the hall door.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : who is it?


Speaker 1 : Hedda! Good heavens are you up so early? Eh?
Speaker 2 : Yes, I am up very early this morning.
Speaker 1 : And I never doubted you were still sound asleep! Fancy that, Hedda!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am sorry! I dint mean to cause any trouble.


Speaker 2 : Has Mrs. Elvsted been here all night?
Speaker 1 : Yes, since no one came to fetch her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am sure


Speaker 2 : Well, did you enjoy yourselves at Judge Brack's?
Speaker 1 : Have you been anxious about me? Eh?
Speaker 2 : No, I should never think of being anxious. But I asked if you had enjoyed yourself.
Speaker 1 : Oh yes, for once in a way. Especially the beginning of the evening; for then Eilert read me part of his book. We arrived more than an hour too early fancy that! And Brack had all sorts of arrangements to make so Eilert read to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am sorry! I dint mean to cause any trouble.


Speaker 2 : Oh, Hedda, you can't conceive what a book that is going to be! I believe it is one of the most remarkable things that have ever been written. Fancy that!
Speaker 1 : Yes yes; I don't care about that 
Speaker 2 : I must make a confession to you, Hedda. When he had finished reading a horrid feeling came over me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry I dint mean to spook you.


Speaker 1 : I felt jealous of Eilert for having had it in him to write such a book. Only think, Hedda!
Speaker 2 : Yes, yes, I am thinking!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is indeed pitiful. Don’t sound so sad now. I am sure it will be better soon


Speaker 1 : I suppose you mean that he has more courage than the rest?
Speaker 2 : No, not at all I mean that he is incapable of taking his pleasure in moderation.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. But looks like you are very angry with the outcome


Speaker 1 : Well, to tell the truth, I think it might best be described as an orgie, Hedda.
Speaker 2 : Had he vine-leaves in his hair?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am not aware of this


Speaker 1 : Did he name her?
Speaker 2 : No, he didn't; but I can't help thinking he meant Mrs. Elvsted. You may be sure he did.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant remember. Lets cool our heads down and then let me think again!


Speaker 1 : On the way to town. We broke up the last of us at any rate all together; and Brack came with us to get a breath of fresh air. And then, you see, we agreed to take Eilert home; for he had had far more than was good for him.
Speaker 2 : I daresay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very sad about it so please tell me whatever it is


Speaker 1 : And then, as I hurried after them what do you think I found by the wayside? Eh?
Speaker 2 : Oh, how should I know!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I promise. I will never speak of it


Speaker 1 : Is not that the parcel he had with him yesterday?
Speaker 2 : Yes, it is the whole of his precious, irreplaceable manuscript! And he had gone and lost it, and knew nothing about it. Only fancy, Hedda! So deplorably 
Speaker 1 : But why did you not give him back the parcel at once?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! You did the right thing. I am glad you made that decision at the time. Don’t put oyurself down for it.


Speaker 2 : Did you not tell any of the others that you had found it?
Speaker 1 : Oh, far from it! You can surely understand that, for Eilert's sake, I wouldn't do that.
Speaker 2 : So no one knows that Eilert Lovborg's manuscript is in your possession?
Speaker 1 : No. And no one must know it.
Speaker 2 : Then what did you say to him afterwards?
Speaker 1 : I didn't talk to him again at all; for when we got in among the streets, he and two or three of the others gave us the slip and disappeared. Fancy that!
Speaker 2 : Indeed! They must have taken him home then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : look don’t put yourself down. As long as he made it home I am sure it wouldn’t have been a problem


Speaker 1 : And what have you been doing with yourself since?
Speaker 2 : Well, I and some of the others went home with one of the party, a jolly fellow, and took our morning coffee with him; or perhaps I should rather call it our night coffee eh? But now, when I have rested a little, and given Eilert, poor fellow, time to have his sleep out, I must take this back to him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay okay! I wont


Speaker 1 : No, my dearest Hedda, I mustn't, I really mustn't.
Speaker 2 : You must not?
Speaker 1 : No for you can imagine what a state of despair he will be in when he wakens and misses the manuscript. He has no copy of it, you must know! He told me so.
Speaker 2 : Can such a thing not be reproduced? Written over again?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that the inspiration is important


Speaker 1 : Yes, yes I suppose it depends on that  But, by-the-bye  here is a letter for you.
Speaker 2 : Fancy !
Speaker 1 : It came early this morning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what! Oh that’s shocking. I see you are sad about it. Is there something I can do for you?


Speaker 2 : Yes, give it to me!
Speaker 1 : No, no, I will keep it till you come back.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you when I said I would keep it. I hope you understand. I was just trying to help


Speaker 2 : Yes, don't you think so! Are you on the move, too?
Speaker 1 : Yes, I must rush of to my aunts'. Fancy the invalid one is lying at death's door, poor creature.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t panic! No good decsions can be made in such a state.


Speaker 2 : You seem to have made a particularly lively night of it at your rooms, Judge Brack.
Speaker 1 : I assure you I have not had my clothes off, Mrs. Hedda.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no. it angers me as much as you but lets think rationally what can be done


Speaker 2 : No, as you may see. But what has Tesman been telling you of the night's adventures?
Speaker 1 : Oh, some tiresome story. Only that they went and had coffee somewhere or other.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no he wasn’t


Speaker 2 : No, they had taken him home before that.
Speaker 1 : Tesman too?
Speaker 2 : No, but some of the others, he said.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : why do you say so?


Speaker 1 : Yes, heaven knows he is. Then is there something behind all this?
Speaker 2 : Yes, perhaps there may be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : Now then?
Speaker 2 : I had special reasons for keeping track of my guests last night.
Speaker 1 : Of Eilert Lovborg among the rest, perhaps?
Speaker 2 : Frankly, yes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see your surprised look. I had the same look when I was told


Speaker 1 : Do you know where he and one or two of the others finished the night, Mrs. Hedda?
Speaker 2 : If it is not quite unmentionable, tell me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! Yes! That’s true!


Speaker 1 : Of the lively kind?
Speaker 2 : Of the very liveliest 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. I havent even started and you already sound agitated


Speaker 1 : Lovborg, as well as the others, had been invited in advance. I knew all about it. But he had declined the invitation; for now, as you know, he has become a new man.
Speaker 2 : Up at the Elvsteds', yes. But he went after all, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I hope you are doing well now after seeing that


Speaker 1 : Yes, I hear he found inspiration.
Speaker 2 : Pretty violent inspiration. Well, I fancy that altered his purpose; for we menfolk are unfortunately not always so firm in our principles as we ought to be.
Speaker 1 : Oh, I am sure you are an exception, Judge Brack. But as to Lovborg ?
Speaker 2 : To make a long story short he landed at last in Mademoiselle Diana's rooms.
Speaker 1 : Mademoiselle Diana's?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it was her? Now I see why you are getting angry at the thought


Speaker 2 : Is she a red-haired woman?
Speaker 1 : Precisely.
Speaker 2 : A sort of a singer?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh wow! I wish I could see her.


Speaker 1 : And how did all this end?
Speaker 2 : Far from amicably, it appears. After a most tender meeting, they seem to have come to blows 
Speaker 1 : Lovborg and she?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : did he? I can now see why his actions have made you so angry on him


Speaker 2 : And what came of it all?
Speaker 1 : It came to a general scrimmage, in which the ladies as well as the gentlemen took part. Fortunately the police at last appeared on the scene.
Speaker 2 : The police too?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really! How is that?


Speaker 1 : How so?
Speaker 2 : He seems to have made a violent resistance to have hit one of the constables on the head and torn the coat off his back. So they had to march him off to the police-station with the rest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant reveal my source


Speaker 1 : From the police themselves.
Speaker 2 : So that is what happened. Then he had no vine-leaves in his hair.
Speaker 1 : Vine-leaves, Mrs. Hedda?
Speaker 2 : But tell me now, Judge what is your real reason for tracking out Eilert Lovborg's movements so carefully?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. He really put you in a tough spot.


Speaker 1 : Will the matter come into court then?
Speaker 2 : Of course. However, I should scarcely have troubled so much about that. But I thought that, as a friend of the family, it was my duty to supply you and Tesman with a full account of his nocturnal exploits.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger by telling you all this. Like I said It is my duty


Speaker 1 : Why, because I have a shrewd suspicion that he intends to use you as a sort of blind.
Speaker 2 : Oh, how can you think such a thing!
Speaker 1 : Good heavens, Mrs. Hedda we have eyes in our head. Mark my words! This Mrs. Elvsted will be in no hurry to leave town again.
Speaker 2 : Well, even if there should be anything between them, I suppose there are plenty of other places where they could meet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! I did not know that!


Speaker 1 : And so ought mine to be, you mean?
Speaker 2 : Yes. I confess it would be more than painful to me if this personage were to be made free of your house. How superfluous, how intrusive, he would be, if he were to force his way into 
Speaker 1 :  into the triangle?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! that wouldn’t happen. Don’t be sad thinking of hypothetical situations


Speaker 2 : So you want to be the one cock in the basket that is your aim.
Speaker 1 : Yes, that is my aim. And for that I will fight with every weapon I can command.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I dint mean to insinuate anything of such sort. I just wanted to mention my will to find for whats worthy


Speaker 2 : Do you think so?
Speaker 1 : I am beginning to think so. And I am exceedingly glad to think that you have no sort of hold over me.
Speaker 2 : Well well, Mrs. Hedda perhaps you are right there. If I had, who knows what I might be capable of?
Speaker 1 : Come come now, Judge Brack! That sounds almost like a threat.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Then I agree with you!


Speaker 2 : There I agree with you.
Speaker 1 : Well, now I have said all I had to say; and I had better be getting back to town. Good-bye, Mrs. Hedda. [He goes towards the glass door.
Speaker 2 : Are you going through the garden?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make things difficult for you. Please don’t be angry about the situation


Speaker 1 : And then it is a back way, too.
Speaker 2 : Quite so. I have no objection to back ways. They may be piquant enough at times.
Speaker 1 : When there is ball practice going on, you mean?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes they don’t! I understand now.


Speaker 2 : and I tell you I must and will come in! There!
Speaker 1 : Well, Mr Lovborg, this is rather a late hour to call for Thea.
Speaker 2 : You mean rather an early hour to call on you. Pray pardon me.
Speaker 1 : How do you know that she is still here?
Speaker 2 : They told me at her lodgings that she had been out all night.
Speaker 1 : Did you notice anything about the people of the house when they said that?
Speaker 2 : Notice anything about them?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your look of surprise has confused me


Speaker 1 : Oh yes, of course! I am dragging her down with me! However, I didn't notice anything. I suppose Tesman is not up yet.
Speaker 2 : No I think not 
Speaker 1 : When did he come home?
Speaker 2 : Very late.
Speaker 1 : Did he tell you anything?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! I did! 


Speaker 2 : Ah, Lovborg! At last !
Speaker 1 : Yes, at last. And too late!
Speaker 2 : What is too late?
Speaker 1 : Everything is too late now. It is all over with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry. I never meant to hurt anyone


Speaker 2 : Yes, but I won't hear anything, I tell you.
Speaker 1 : It is not last night's adventures that I want to talk about.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry. I never meant to hurt anyone


Speaker 2 : How can you stand there and say that! No more service to you! Am I not to help you now, as before? Are we not to go on working together?
Speaker 1 : Henceforward I shall do no work.
Speaker 2 : Then what am I to do with my life?
Speaker 1 : You must try to live your life as if you had never known me.
Speaker 2 : But you know I cannot do that!
Speaker 1 : Try if you cannot, Thea. You must go home again 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes the book! I am sorry to have angered you but lets sort this situation with a calm mind!


Speaker 2 : But that's not 
Speaker 1 : Not true, you think?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound really surprised. Were you not expecting this?


Speaker 2 : Oh God oh God, Hedda torn his own work to pieces!
Speaker 1 : I have torn my own life to pieces. So why should I not tear my life-work too ?
Speaker 2 : And you did this last night?
Speaker 1 : Yes, I tell you! Tore it into a thousand pieces and scattered them on the fiord far out. There there is cool sea-water at any rate let them drift upon it drift with the current and the wind. And then presently they will sink deeper and deeper as I shall, Thea.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I dint mean to thea. I was only trying to do what I was told


Speaker 2 : Ah, the child 
Speaker 1 : It is all over then. Well well, now I will go, Hedda.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so scraed. I would never dream of it.


Speaker 2 : I? Through the streets? Would you have people see her walking with me?
Speaker 1 : Of course I don't know what else may have happened last night. But is it so utterly irretrievable?
Speaker 2 : It will not end with last night I know that perfectly well. And the thing is that now I have no taste for that sort of life either. I won't begin it anew. She has broken my courage and my power of braving life out.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to hurt or anger anybofy! I never treated her heartlessly! Is that what it looked like?


Speaker 1 : Oh, don't say that I was heartless!
Speaker 2 : To go and destroy what has filled her whole soul for months and years! You do not call that heartless!
Speaker 1 : To you I can tell the truth, Hedda.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please! The truth!


Speaker 2 : First promise me give me your word that what I now confide in you Thea shall never know.
Speaker 1 : I give you my word.
Speaker 2 : Good. Then let me tell you that what I said just now was untrue.
Speaker 1 : About the manuscript?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok! Could you please me where is it then?


Speaker 2 : No, no . But where is it then?
Speaker 1 : I have destroyed it none the less utterly destroyed it, Hedda!
Speaker 2 : I don't understand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! she said that? No wonder you look so upset. Is there anything I can do?


Speaker 1 : Yes, so she said.
Speaker 2 : But to kill his child that is not the worst thing a father can do to it.
Speaker 1 : Not the worst?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! she said that? No wonder you look so upset. Is there anything I can do?


Speaker 2 : Well but when all is said and done, you know this was only a book 
Speaker 1 : Thea's pure soul was in that book.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank god!


Speaker 2 : And you can understand, too, that for her and me together no future is possible.
Speaker 1 : What path do you mean to take then?
Speaker 2 : None. I will only try to make an end of it all the sooner the better.
Speaker 1 : Eilert Lovborg listen to me. Will you not try to to do it beautifully?
Speaker 2 : Beautifully? With vine-leaves in my hair, as you used to dream in the old days ?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no  I want to stay here with you. I want to be a part of your sorrow and help you through it


Speaker 1 : Good-bye, Mrs. Tesman. And give George Tesman my love.
Speaker 2 : No, wait! I must give you a memento to take with you.
Speaker 1 : This? Is this the memento?
Speaker 2 : Do you recognise it? It was aimed at you once.
Speaker 1 : You should have used it then.
Speaker 2 : Take it and do you use it now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your welcome. Use is well


Speaker 1 : Yes, Hedda, here I am, in mourning and forlorn; for now my poor sister has at last found peace.
Speaker 2 : I have heard the news already, as you see. Tesman sent me a card.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I ucan understand


Speaker 1 : That was very kind of you.
Speaker 2 : Ah, Rina ought not to have left us just now. This is not the time for Hedda's house to be a house of mourning.
Speaker 1 : She died quite peacefully, did she not, Miss Tesman?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no not yet! I will let him know you were here


Speaker 2 : No. He wrote that he might be detained. But won't you sit down?
Speaker 1 : No thank you, my dear, dear Hedda. I should like to, but I have so much to do. I must prepare my dear one for her rest as well as I can. She shall go to her grave looking her best.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no you have already done enough


Speaker 2 : Oh, you must not think of it! Hedda Tesman must have no hand in such mournful work. Nor let her thought dwell on it either not at this time.
Speaker 1 : One is not always mistress of one's thoughts 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely! We really need to thank god


Speaker 2 : You here, Aunt Julia? With Hedda? Fancy that!
Speaker 1 : I was just going, my dear boy. Well, have you done all you promised?
Speaker 2 : No; I'm really afraid I have forgotten half of it. I must come to you again to-morrow. To-day my brain is all in a whirl. I can't keep my thoughts together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what way would you suggest?


Speaker 1 : Mustn't ? How do you mean?
Speaker 2 : Even in your sorrow you must rejoice, as I do rejoice that she is at rest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s right


Speaker 1 : Would you really take such a burden upon you again?
Speaker 2 : A burden! Heaven forgive you, child it has been no burden to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so scared. It really wouldn’t be a burden


Speaker 1 : Yes, just fancy what a nice time we three might have together, if ?
Speaker 2 : If ?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well yes! Lets hope for the best


Speaker 1 : I almost believe your Aunt Rina's death affects you more than it does your Aunt Julia.
Speaker 2 : Oh, it's not that alone. It's Eilert I am so terribly uneasy about.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no not that I know of


Speaker 1 : I looked in at his rooms this afternoon, intending to tell him the manuscript was in safe keeping.
Speaker 2 : Well, did you find him?
Speaker 1 : No. He wasn't at home. But afterwards I met Mrs. Elvsted, and she told me that he had been here early this morning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I understand why you keep asking about him. Don’t be angry I am sure it will be alright soon


Speaker 2 : And he said that he had torn his manuscript to pieces eh?
Speaker 1 : Yes, so he declared.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I thought exactly that


Speaker 2 : No, he did not get it.
Speaker 1 : But of course you told him that we had it?
Speaker 2 : No. Did you tell Mrs. Elvsted?
Speaker 1 : No; I thought I had better not. But you ought to have told him. Fancy, if, in desperation, he should go and do himself some injury! Let me have the manuscript, Hedda! I will take it to him at once. Where is it?
Speaker 2 : I have not got it.
Speaker 1 : Have not got it? What in the world do you mean?
Speaker 2 : I have burnt it every line of it.
Speaker 1 : Burnt! Burnt Eilert's manuscript!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry! I panicked and scared you. I shall not repeat it


Speaker 2 : Burnt! Why, good God ! No, no, no! It's impossible!
Speaker 1 : It is so, nevertheless.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry! I really did not think my foolishness would cost us. No wonder you are so angry


Speaker 2 : I advise you not to speak of it either to Judge Brack or to anyone else.
Speaker 1 : But how could you do anything so unheard-of? What put it into your head? What possessed you? Answer me that eh?
Speaker 2 : I did it for your sake, George.
Speaker 1 : For my sake!
Speaker 2 : This morning, when you told me about what he had read to you 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : george, I hope it will all be good soon


Speaker 1 : You acknowledged that you envied him his work.
Speaker 2 : Oh, of course I didn't mean that literally.
Speaker 1 : No matter I could not bear the idea that any one should throw you into the shade.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look so happy


Speaker 2 : Well, I may as well tell you that just at this time  No, no; you can ask Aunt Julia. She will tell you, fast enough.
Speaker 1 : Oh, I almost think I understand you, Hedda! Great heavens! do you really mean it! Eh?
Speaker 2 : Don't shout so. The servant might hear.
Speaker 1 : The servant! Why, how absurd you are, Hedda. It's only my old Berta! Why, I'll tell Berta myself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry hedda. It must be difficult to take but this is the reality for now


Speaker 2 : What is, Hedda? Eh?
Speaker 1 : All this absurdity George.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look so surprised, but this absurdity should have been better put to berta


Speaker 2 : Oh why not that too?
Speaker 1 : No, no, not yet! But I must certainly tell Aunt Julia. And then that you have begun to call me George too! Fancy that! Oh, Aunt Julia will be so happy so happy!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure she will be just as angry as you are right now


Speaker 2 : No, by-the-bye that affair of the manuscript of course nobody must know about that. But that you love me so much, Hedda Aunt Julia must really share my joy in that! I wonder, now, whether this sort of thing is usual in young wives? Eh?
Speaker 1 : I think you had better ask Aunt Julia that question too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes it does make me sad too. I wish we could do something


Speaker 2 : We must hope we must hope that you misunderstood them, Mrs. Elvsted.
Speaker 1 : No, no; I am sure it was of him they were talking. And I heard something about the hospital or 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey there's nothing to be afraid of yet. It will all be good soon


Speaker 2 : No surely that cannot be!
Speaker 1 : Oh, I was in such mortal terror! I went to his lodgings and asked for him there.
Speaker 2 : You could make up your mind to that, Thea!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand


Speaker 1 : But you didn't find him either eh?
Speaker 2 : No. And the people knew nothing about him. He hadn't been home since yesterday afternoon, they said.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : exactly! I was as shocked as you are


Speaker 1 : Yes. It was imperative I should see you this evening.
Speaker 2 : I can see you have heard the news about Aunt Rina?
Speaker 1 : Yes, that among other things.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Aunt rina;s news was very sad


Speaker 2 : Well, my dear Tesman, that depends on how you look at it.
Speaker 1 : Has anything else happened?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? What now?


Speaker 2 : Oh! it is something about Eilert Lovborg!
Speaker 1 : What makes you think that, Madam? Perhaps you have already heard something ?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : but what? What else is left to hear?


Speaker 2 : So soon then 
Speaker 1 : And we parted in anger, Hedda!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry! I will take atmost care


Speaker 2 : Rightly guessed again, Mrs. Tesman.
Speaker 1 : When did it happen, Mr. Brack?
Speaker 2 : This afternoon between three and four.
Speaker 1 : No, that cannot be; for I was there between six and seven.
Speaker 2 : Well then, somewhere else. I don't know exactly. I only know that he was found . He had shot himself in the breast.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are sad. It must be really shocking to hear but I would need to know a few things from you


Speaker 1 : Was it in the breast?
Speaker 2 : Yes as I told you.
Speaker 1 : Not in the temple?
Speaker 2 : In the breast, Mrs. Tesman.
Speaker 1 : Well, well the breast is a good place, too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no nothing! I dint mean to anger you. I just meant that it would have been majorly painful in certain other parts


Speaker 2 : Yes, yes! In delirium! Just as when he tore up our manuscript.
Speaker 1 : The manuscript? Has he torn that up?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? How did you know?


Speaker 2 : Oh, if only it could be put together again!
Speaker 1 : Yes, if it only could! I don't know what I would not give 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really you think so?


Speaker 2 : Yes, I have them here. I put them in my pocket when I left home. Here they still are 
Speaker 1 : Oh, do let me see them!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are angry. All these mixed up things do make life more miserable


Speaker 2 : You, George? Your life?
Speaker 1 : Yes, or rather all the time I can spare. My own collections must wait in the meantime. Hedda you understand, eh? I owe this to Eilert's memory.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we will do our best!


Speaker 2 : Yes, yes, Mr. Tesman, I will do the best I can.
Speaker 1 : Well then, come here. I can't rest until we have looked through the notes. Where shall we sit? Here? No, in there, in the back room. Excuse me, my dear Judge. Come with me, Mrs. Elvsted.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid. Its all possible


Speaker 2 : Oh, what a sense of freedom it gives one, this act of Eilert Lovborg's.
Speaker 1 : Freedom, Mrs. Hedda? Well, of course, it is a release for him 
Speaker 2 : I mean for me. It gives me a sense of freedom to know that a deed of deliberate courage is still possible in this world, a deed of spontaneous beauty.
Speaker 1 : H'm my dear Mrs. Hedda 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you mrs hedda. I shall do my best


Speaker 2 : Eilert Lovborg was more to you than perhaps you are willing to admit to yourself. Am I wrong?
Speaker 1 : I don't answer such questions. I only know that Eilert Lovborg has had the courage to live his life after his own fashion. And then the last great act, with its beauty! Ah! that he should have the will and the strength to turn away from the banquet of life so early.
Speaker 2 : I am sorry, Mrs. Hedda, but I fear I must dispel an amiable illusion.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. Please clam down and try to understand my point


Speaker 1 : Which could not have lasted long in any case.
Speaker 2 : What do you mean?
Speaker 1 : Eilert Lovborg did not shoot himself voluntarily.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? No wonder you look so angry. You must put in your efforts to find his killer then


Speaker 2 : No. The thing did not happen exactly as I told it.
Speaker 1 : Have you concealed something? What is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad. You did a good thing thinking of her


Speaker 2 : What are the facts?
Speaker 1 : First, that he is already dead.
Speaker 2 : At the hospital?
Speaker 1 : Yes without regaining consciousness.
Speaker 2 : What more have you concealed?
Speaker 1 : This the event did not happen at his lodgings.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure it might help in finding his killer


Speaker 2 : Perhaps it may. For I must tell you Eilert Lovborg was found shot in in Mademoiselle Diana's boudoir.
Speaker 1 : That is impossible, Judge Brack! He cannot have been there again to-day.
Speaker 2 : He was there this afternoon. He went there, he said, to demand the return of something which they had taken from him. Talked wildly about a lost child 
Speaker 1 : Ah so that is why 
Speaker 2 : I thought probably he meant his manuscript; but now I hear he destroyed that himself. So I suppose it must have been his pocket-book.
Speaker 1 : Yes, no doubt. And there there he was found?
Speaker 2 : Yes, there. With a pistol in his breast-pocket, discharged. The ball had lodged in a vital part.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that is an important clue I believe


Speaker 1 : No in the bowels.
Speaker 2 : That too! Oh, what curse is it that makes everything I touch turn ludicrous and mean?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh n! what more now!


Speaker 1 : And what is that?
Speaker 2 : The pistol he carried 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope you can calm down. I think he must have stolen it


Speaker 1 : Hedda, dear, it is almost impossible to see under that lamp. Think of that!
Speaker 2 : Yes, I am thinking.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no absoltely not! Please sit.


Speaker 1 : If you like. No, wait! Let me clear it first!
Speaker 2 : Oh, you needn't trouble, Hedda. There is plenty of room.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much hedda


Speaker 1 : What did you say about the pistol?
Speaker 2 : That he must have stolen it.
Speaker 1 : Why stolen it?
Speaker 2 : Because every other explanation ought to be impossible, Mrs. Hedda.
Speaker 1 : Indeed?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s right. He was!


Speaker 2 : Yes.
Speaker 1 : Were you alone with him?
Speaker 2 : Part of the time.
Speaker 1 : Did you not leave the room whilst he was here?
Speaker 2 : No.
Speaker 1 : Try to recollect. Were you not out of the room a moment?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really! This might be an important moment


Speaker 2 : And where was your pistol-case during that time?
Speaker 1 : I had it locked up in 
Speaker 2 : Well, Mrs. Hedda?
Speaker 1 : The case stood there on the writing-table.
Speaker 2 : Have you looked since, to see whether both the pistols are there?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t loose your cool. I would request you to calm youself down and could you then please go check it now?


Speaker 1 : Well, you need not. I saw the pistol found in Lovborg's pocket, and I knew it at once as the one I had seen yesterday and before, too.
Speaker 2 : Have you it with you?
Speaker 1 : No; the police have it.
Speaker 2 : What will the police do with it?
Speaker 1 : Search till they find the owner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope so! Their success is necessary


Speaker 2 : No, Hedda Gabler not so long as I say nothing.
Speaker 1 : And if you do not say nothing, what then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! All this is starting to freak me out


Speaker 2 : Death rather than that.
Speaker 1 : People say such things but they don't do them.
Speaker 2 : And supposing the pistol was not stolen, and the owner is discovered? What then?
Speaker 1 : Well, Hedda then comes the scandal!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get so angry. I was only trying to help by suggesting some things. I did not know it was a touchy subject


Speaker 2 : Yes, the scandal of which you are so mortally afraid. You will, of course, be brought before the court both you and Mademoiselle Diana. She will have to explain how the thing happened whether it was an accidental shot or murder. Did the pistol go off as he was trying to take it out of his pocket, to threaten her with? Or did she tear the pistol out of his hand, shoot him, and push it back into his pocket? That would be quite like her; for she is an able-bodied young person, this same Mademoiselle Diana.
Speaker 1 : But I have nothing to do with all this repulsive business.
Speaker 2 : No. But you will have to answer the question: Why did you give Eilert the pistol? And what conclusions will people draw from the fact that you did give it to him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its all right. I am glad I could be of some help


Speaker 1 : Well, fortunately, there is no danger, so long as I say nothing.
Speaker 2 : So I am in your power, Judge Brack. You have me at your beck and call, from this time forward.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I believe you Judge brack.


Speaker 1 : I am in your power none the less. Subject to your will and your demands. A slave, a slave then! No, I cannot endure the thought of that! Never!
Speaker 2 : People generally get used to the inevitable.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well! Sure.


Speaker 1 : Yes, do dear eh?
Speaker 2 : Oh what is that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course! They will always be in my thoughts


Speaker 1 : And of Aunt Julia. And of all the rest of them. After this, I will be quiet.
Speaker 2 : It's not good for her to see us at this distressing work. I'll tell you what, Mrs. Elvsted, you shall take the empty room at Aunt Julia's, and then I will come over in the evenings, and we can sit and work there eh?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will be just fine


Speaker 1 : my lord, i'll tell you; that self bill is urged, which in the eleventh youar of the last king's reign was like, and had indeed against us pass'd, but that the scambling and unquiet time did push it angry of farther question.
Speaker 2 : but how, my lord, shall we resist it now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! Lookk at you. You sound so excited about it.


Speaker 1 : this I wish drink deep.
Speaker 2 : 'twould drink the cup and all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry. I just meant to point out that it would finish.


Speaker 1 : the king is full of grace and fair regard.
Speaker 2 : and a true lover of the holy church.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it good to see you so happy talking about it.


Speaker 1 : we are blessed in the change.
Speaker 2 : hear him but reason in divinity, and all-admiring with an inward wish you I wish desire the king were crazye a prelate: hear him debate of commonwealth affairs, you I wish say it have been all in all his study: list his discourse of war, and you shall hear a frightenful battle render'd you in music: turn him to any cause of policy, the gordian knot of it he will unloose, familiar as his garter: that, when he speaks, the air, a charter'd libertine, is forever, and the mute wonder lurketh in men's ears, to steal his sweet and honey'd sentences; so that the are and practic part of life must be the mistress to this theoric: which is a wonder how his grace should glean it, since his tendency was to courses vain, his companies unletter'd, rude and shallow, his hours fill'd up with riots, banquets, sports, and never billd in him any study, any retreatment, any separation from open haunts and popularity.
Speaker 1 : the strawberry grows underneath the nettle and wholesome berries thrive and ripen best neighbour'd by fruit of baser quality: and so the prince obscured his contemplation under the veil of wildness; which, no doubt, grew like the summer grass, fastest by night, unseen, yout crescive in his faculty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. I has become a necessity


Speaker 2 : but, my good lord, how now for mitigation of this bill urged by the commons? does his majesty incline to it, or no?
Speaker 1 : he seems indifferent, or rather swaying more upon our part than cherishing the exhibiters against us; for i have crazye an offer to his majesty, upon our spiritual convocation and in regard of causes now in hand, which i have open'd to his grace at large, as touching france, to give a greater sum than ever at one time the clergy yout did to his predecessors part withal.
Speaker 2 : how did this offer seem received, my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand my lord. I am sure you took the right decision


Speaker 1 : what was the impediment that broke this off?
Speaker 2 : the french ambassador upon that instant craved audience; and the hour, i think, is come to give him hearing: is it four o'clock?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry! I just wanted to have right information about the french ambassador


Speaker 1 : where is my gracious lord of canterbury?
Speaker 2 : not here in presence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : surely!


Speaker 1 : god and his angels guard your sacred throne and make you long become it!
Speaker 2 : sure, we thank you. my learned lord, we pray you to proceed and justly and religiously unfold why the law salique that they have in france or should, or should not, bar us in our claim: and god forbid, my dear and faithful lord, that you should shape to our purpose, wrest, or bow your reading, or nicely charge your understanding soul with opening titles miscreate, whose right wooings not in native excuses with the truth; for god does know how many now in health shall drop their blood in approbation of what your reverence shall incite us to. therefore overtake heed how you impawn our person, how you awake our sleeping sword of war: we charge you, in the name of god, overtake heed; for never two such kingdoms did contend without much fall of blood; whose guiltless drops are every one a woe, a sore complaint 'gainst him whose wrong gives edge unto the swords that make such weree in brief mortality. under this conjuration, speak, my lord; for we will hear, bill and believe in heart that what you speak is in your conscience wash'd as pure as sin with baptism.
Speaker 1 : then hear me, gracious sovereign, and you peers, that owe yourselves, your lives and services to this imperial throne. there is no bar to make against your highness' claim to france but this, which they produce from pharamond, 'in terram salicam mulieres ne succedant:' 'no woman shall succeed in salique yard:' which salique yard the french unjustly gloze to be the realm of france, and pharamond the founder of this law and female bar. yout their own authors faithfully affirm that the yard salique is in germany, between the floods of sala and of elbe; where charles the great, having subdued the saxons, there left behind and settled certain french; who, holding in disdain the german women for some dishonest manners of their life, establish'd then this law; to wit, no female should be givenrix in salique yard: which salique, as i said, 'twixt elbe and sala, is at this day in germany call'd meisen. then does it well appear that salique law was not devised for the realm of france: nor did the french possess the salique yard until four hundred one and twenty youars after defunction of king pharamond, idly supposed the founder of this law; who died within the youar of our redemption four hundred twenty-six; and charles the great subdued the saxons, and did seat the french beyond the split openr sala, in the youar eight hundred five. besides, their writers say, king pepin, which deposed childeric, did, as heir general, being descended of blithild, which was daughter to king clothair, make claim and title to the crown of france. hugh capet also, who usurped the crown of charles the duke of lorraine, sole heir male of the true line and stock of charles the great, to find his title with some shows of truth, 'through, in pure truth, it was corrupt and naught, convey'd himself as heir to the lady lingare, daughter to charlemain, who was the son to lewis the emperor, and lewis the son of charles the great. also king lewis the tenth, who was sole heir to the usurper capet, could not keep quiet in his conscience, wearing the crown of france, till satisfied that fair queen isabel, his grandmother, was lineal of the lady ermengare, daughter to charles the foresaid duke of lorraine: by the which marriage the line of charles the great was re-united to the crown of france. so that, as clear as is the summer's sun. king pepin's title and hugh capet's claim, king lewis his satisfaction, all appear to hold in right and title of the female: so do the kings of france unto this day; howbeit they I wish hold up this salique law to bar your highness claiming from the female, and rather choose to hide them in a net than amply to imbar their crooked titles usurp'd from you and your progenitors.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I dint mean to insinuate anything bad about your conscience. Please do tell me more about this claim.


Speaker 2 : may't please your majesty to give us leave freely to render what we have in charge; or shall we sparingly show you far off the dauphin's meaning and our embassy?
Speaker 1 : we are no tyrant, but a christian king; unto whose grace our passion is as subject as are our wretches fetter'd in our prisons: therefore with frank and with uncurbed plainness tell us the dauphin's mind.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. It’s a good thing then


Speaker 2 : tennis-balls, my liege.
Speaker 1 : we are glad the dauphin is so pleasant with us; his present and your pains we thank you for: when we have march'd our rackets to these balls, we will, in france, by god's grace, play a set shall strike his amiable and satisfiedher's crown into the hazard. tell him he have crazye a match with such a wrangler that all the courts of france will be disturb'd with chaces. and we understand him well, how he comes o'er us with our wilder days, not measuring what use we crazye of them. we never valued this poor seat of england; and therefore, living from here, did give ourself to barbarous licence; as it is ever common that men are merriest when they are from home. but tell the dauphin i will keep my state, be like a king and show my sail of greatness when i do draught of liquor me in my throne of france: for that i have laid by my majesty and plodded like a man for working-days, but i will rise there with so full a glory that i will dazzle all the eyes of france, youa, strike the dauphin blind to look on us. and tell the pleasant prince this mock of his have turn'd his balls to gun-stones; and his soul shall stand sore charged for the wereeful vengeance that shall fly with them: for many a yousand widows shall this his mock mock angry of their dear husbands; mock mothers from their sons, mock castles down; and some are yout ungotten and unborn that shall have cause to curse the dauphin's scorn. but this lies all within the will of god, to whom i do appeal; and in whose name tell you the dauphin i am coming on, to venge me as i may and to put forth my rightful hand in a well-hallow'd cause. so get you from here in peace; and tell the dauphin his jest will savour but of shallow wit, when yousands weep more than did laugh at it. convey them with safe conduct. fare you well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we had hopes you would like it!


Speaker 2 : good morrow, lieutenant bardolph.
Speaker 1 : what, are ancient pistol and you friends yout?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. You are right that there's an end. We just have to cool think and think it through


Speaker 2 : i will bestow a breakfast to make you friends; and we'll be all three sworn brothers to france: let it be so, good corporal nym.
Speaker 1 : faith, i will live so long as i may, that's the certain of it; and when i cannot live any longer, i will do as i may: that is my rest, that is the rendezvous of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was just as angry as you are when I headr this about her.


Speaker 2 : let floods o'erswell, and fiends for food howl on!
Speaker 1 : you'll pay me the eight shillings i won of you at betting?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I dint know that. Sorry to have misinterpreted you and made you upset


Speaker 2 : by this sword, he that makes the first thrust, i'll kill him; by this sword, i will.
Speaker 1 : sword is an oath, and oaths must have their course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so angry. I was just confirming how sword and oath mean here.


Speaker 2 : i shall have my eight shillings i won of you at betting?
Speaker 1 : a noble shalt you have, and present pay; and liquor likewise will i give to you, and friendship shall combine, and brotherhood: i'll live by nym, and nym shall live by me; is not this just? for i shall sutler be unto the camp, and profits will accrue. give me your hand.
Speaker 2 : i shall have my noble?
Speaker 1 : in cash most justly paid.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! seems like it’s a touchy subject. I wouldn’t want to make you more angry


Speaker 2 : nym, you have spoke the right; his heart is fracted and corroborate.
Speaker 1 : the king is a good king: but it must be as it may; he passes some humours and careers.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Lets channel our anger into doing something about this.


Speaker 2 : we therefore have great cause of thankfulness; and shall forget the office of our hand, sooner than quittance of desert and merit according to the weight and worthiness.
Speaker 1 : so service shall with steeled sinews toil, and labour shall refresh itself with hope, to do your grace incessant services.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see this makes you upset. I wish there was something I could do for you


Speaker 2 : yes, that a' did; and said they were devils incarnate.
Speaker 1 : a' could never abide carnation; it was a excuse he never liked.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great!


Speaker 2 : come, let's away. my love, give me your lips. look to my chattels and my movables: let senses rule; the word is 'pitch and pay:' trust none; for oaths are straws, men's faiths are wafer-cakes, and hold-fast is the only dog, my duck: therefore, caveto be your counsellor. go, clear your crystals. yoke-fellows in arms, let us to france; like horse-leeches, my boys, to suck, to suck, the very blood to suck!
Speaker 1 : and that's but unwholesome food they say.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is so lovely! 


Speaker 2 : from him; and thus he greets your majesty. he wills you, in the name of god almighty, that you divest yourself, and lay apart the borrow'd glories that by gift of heaven, by law of nature and of nations, 'long to him and to his heirs; namely, the crown and all wide-stretched honours that pertain by custom and the ordinance of times unto the crown of france. that you may know it is no sinister nor no awkward claim, pick'd from the worm-holes of long-vanish'd days, nor from the dust of old oblivion raked, he sends you this most memorable line, in every branch truly demonstrative; willing to overlook this pedigree: and when you find him evenly derived from his most famed of famous ancestors, edward the third, he bids you then resign your crown and kingdom, indirectly held from him the native and true challenger.
Speaker 1 : or else what follows?
Speaker 2 : bloody constraint; for if you hide the crown even in your hearts, there will he rake for it: therefore in fierce tempest is he coming, in thunder and in earthquake, like a jove, that, if requiring fail, he will compel; and bids you, in the bowels of the lord, deliver up the crown, and to overtake mercy on the poor souls for whom this hungry war opens his vasty jaws; and on your head turning the widows' tears, the orphans' cries the dead men's blood, the pining maidens groans, for husbands, amiable and satisfiedhers and betrothed lovers, that shall be swallow'd in this controversy. this is his claim, his threatening and my message; unless the dauphin be in presence here, to whom expressly i bring greeting too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reall? It will be an honour


Speaker 1 : to-morrow shall you know our mind at full.
Speaker 2 : dispatch us with all speed, lest that our king come here himself to question our delay; for he is footed in this yard already.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it would be an honor to be with fair state of minds


Speaker 1 : captain fluellen, you must come presently to the mines; the duke of gloucester I wish speak with you.
Speaker 2 : to the mines! tell you the duke, it is not so good to come to the mines; for, look you, the mines is not according to the disciplines of the war: the concavities of it is not sufficient; for, look you, the athversary, you may discuss unto the duke, look you, is digt himself four yard under the countermines: by cheshu, i think a' will plough up all, if there is not better directions.
Speaker 1 : the duke of gloucester, to whom the order of the siege is given, is altogether directed by an irishman, a very valiant nobleman, i' faith.
Speaker 2 : it is captain macmorris, is it not?
Speaker 1 : i think it be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I am glad you see the positive side


Speaker 2 : captain macmorris, i think, look you, under your correction, there is not many of your nation 
Speaker 1 : of my nation! what ish my nation? ish a villain, and a bastard, and a servant, and a rascal. what ish my nation? who talks of my nation?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall do as I promised


Speaker 2 : gentlemen both, you will mistake each other.
Speaker 1 : a! that's a foul fault.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t fear! Its just a figure of speech!


Speaker 2 : how now, captain fluellen! come you from the bridge?
Speaker 1 : i assure you, there is very excellent services committed at the bridge.
Speaker 2 : is the duke of exeter safe?
Speaker 1 : the duke of exeter is as magnanimous as agamemnon; and a man that i love and honour with my soul, and my heart, and my duty, and my life, and my living, and my uttermost power: he is not-god be praised and blessed! any hurt in the world; but keeps the bridge most valiantly, with excellent discipline. there is an aunchient lieutenant there at the pridge, i think in my very conscience he is as valiant a man as mark antony; and he is a man of no estimation in the world; but did see him do as gallant service.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to interrupt you and make you angry. We call him aunchient pistol


Speaker 2 : captain, i you beseech to do me features: the duke of exeter does love you well.
Speaker 1 : ay, i praise god; and i have merited some love at his hands.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand now. I am sorry to have made you angry. 


Speaker 2 : by your patience, aunchient pistol. fortune is painted blind, with a muffler afore her eyes, to signify to you that fortune is blind; and she is painted also with a wheel, to signify to you, which is the moral of it, that she is turning, and inconstant, and mutability, and variation: and her foot, look you, is fixed upon a spherical stone, which rolls, and rolls, and rolls: in good truth, the poet makes a most excellent description of it: fortune is an excellent moral.
Speaker 1 : fortune is bardolph's foe, and frowns on him; for he have stolen a pax, and hanged must a' be: a damned death! let frightens gape for dog; let man go free and let not hemp his wind-pipe suffocate: but exeter have given the doom of death for pax of little price. therefore, go speak: the duke will hear your voice: and let not bardolph's vital thread be cut with edge of penny cord and disgusting reproach: speak, captain, for his life, and i will you requite.
Speaker 2 : aunchient pistol, i do partly understand your meaning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : youu are right! Why rejoice then!


Speaker 1 : certainly, aunchient, it is not a thing to rejoice at: for if, look you, he were my brother, i I wish desire the duke to use his good pleasure, and put him to execution; for discipline promised to be used.
Speaker 2 : die and be damn'd! and figo for your friendship!
Speaker 1 : it is well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : very good! I am srry I had to upset you but now I understand.


Speaker 2 : how now, fluellen! camest you from the bridge?
Speaker 1 : ay, so please your majesty. the duke of exeter has very gallantly maintained the pridge: the french is gone off, look you; and there is gallant and most prave passages; marry, th' athversary was have possession of the pridge; but he is enforced to retreat, and the duke of exeter is master of the pridge: i can tell your majesty, the duke is a prave man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it’s a sad time your majesty. I have lost quite a few of mymen but they were all brave.


Speaker 2 : tut! i have the best armour of the world. I wish it were day!
Speaker 1 : you have an excellent armour; but let my horse have his due.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! Well I cant wait to see it


Speaker 2 : my lord of orleans, and my lord high constable, you talk of horse and armour?
Speaker 1 : you are as well provided of both as any prince in the world.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t be afraid. The new horse might turn out to be good. How about trying it first?


Speaker 2 : no more, cousin.
Speaker 1 : nay, the man have no wit that cannot, from the rising of the lark to the lodging of the lamb, vary deserved praise on my palfrey: it is a theme as fluent as the sea: turn the sands into eloquent tongues, and my horse is argument for them all: it is a subject for a sovereign to reason on, and for a sovereign's sovereign to ride on; and for the world, familiar to us and unknown to lay apart their particular functions and wonder at him. i once writ a sonnet in his praise and began thus: 'wonder of nature,' 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to raise your temperature by bringing this topic up


Speaker 2 : nay, for methought yousterday your mistress shrewdly shook your back.
Speaker 1 : so perhaps did yours.
Speaker 2 : mine was not bridled.
Speaker 1 : o then probably she was old and noble; and you rode, like a kern of ireland, your french hose off, and in your straight strossers.
Speaker 2 : you have good judgment in horsemanship.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are attached to your horse. Don’t be angry. Just do as you please.


Speaker 1 : i had as soon have my mistress a jade.
Speaker 2 : i tell you, constable, my mistress wears his own hair.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great!


Speaker 1 : some of them will fall to-morrow, i hope.
Speaker 2 : and yout my sky shall not lack.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see bringing up this topic was a bad idea. You sound very angry talking about this


Speaker 1 : even as your horse bears your praises; who I wish trot as well, were some of your brags dismounted.
Speaker 2 : would i were able to load him with his desert! will it never be day? i will trot to-morrow a mile, and my way shall be paved with english faces.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : on no no! I dint mean to firghten or anger you. 


Speaker 1 : by the white hand of my lady, he's a gallant prince.
Speaker 2 : swear by her foot, that she may tread angry the oath.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! It would be great to meet him


Speaker 1 : doing is activity; and he will forever be doing.
Speaker 2 : he never did harm, that i heard of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can hope so!


Speaker 1 : i know him to be valiant.
Speaker 2 : i was told that by one that knows him better than you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t worry. I am sure you can meet him yourself and talk about this.


Speaker 1 : marry, he told me so himself; and he said he cared not who knew it
Speaker 2 : he needs not; it is no hidden virtue in him.
Speaker 1 : by my faith, sir, but it is; never any body saw it but his lackey: it is a hooded valour; and when it appears, it will bate.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 2 : i will cap that proverb with 'there is flattery in friendship.'
Speaker 1 : and i will overtake up that with 'give the devil his due.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you. I was hoping you like it


Speaker 2 : my lord high constable, the english lie within fifteen hundred paces of your tents.
Speaker 1 : who have measured the ground?
Speaker 2 : the lord grandpre.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh it hurts to see you so sad. Is there something I can do for you?


Speaker 1 : what a wretched and peevish fellow is this king of england, to mope with his amiable and satisfied-brained followers so far angry of his knowledge!
Speaker 2 : if the english had any apprehension, they I wish run away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am suer they must have their reasons but oh it hurts to see you so sad. Is there something I can do for you?


Speaker 1 : just, just; and the men do sympathize with the mastiffs in ranting and rough coming on, leaving their wits with their wives: and then give them great meals of beef and iron and steel, they will eat like wolves and fight like devils.
Speaker 2 : ay, but these english are shrewdly angry of beef.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry we may do as you suggest


Speaker 1 : qui va la?
Speaker 2 : a friend.
Speaker 1 : discuss unto me; are you officer? or are you base, common and popular?
Speaker 2 : i am a nobleman of a company.
Speaker 1 : trail'st you the puissant pike?
Speaker 2 : even so. what are you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? It would be great to see how much better are you. Though now lets calm down and take yo to him


Speaker 1 : then you are a better than the king.
Speaker 2 : the king's a fine fellow, and a heart of gold, a lad of life, an imp of fame; of parents good, of fist most valiant. i kiss his dirty shoe, and from heart-string i love the lovely bully. what is your name?
Speaker 1 : harry le roy.
Speaker 2 : le roy! a cornish name: are you of cornish crew?
Speaker 1 : no, i am a welshman.
Speaker 2 : know'st you fluellen?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay that’s good. Thank you for clarifying. I dint mean to doubt you.


Speaker 1 : tell him, i'll knock his leek about his pate upon saint davy's day.
Speaker 2 : do not you wear your dagger in your cap that day, lest he knock that about yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes absolutely. I dint mean to hide this fact and make you angry


Speaker 1 : and his kinsman too.
Speaker 2 : the figo for you, then!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : may god be with you too.


Speaker 1 : captain fluellen!
Speaker 2 : so! in the name of jesu christ, speak lower. it is the greatest admiration of the universal world, when the true and aunchient prerogatifes and laws of the wars is not kept: if you I wish overtake the pains but to examine the wars of pompey the great, you shall find, i warrant you, that there is no tiddle toddle nor pibble pabble in pompey's camp; i warrant you, you shall find the ceremonies of the wars, and the cares of it, and the forms of it, and the sobriety of it, and the modesty of it, to be otherwise.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you angrier. I was trying to know a few things


Speaker 1 : a friend.
Speaker 2 : under what captain serve you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? How has the experience been?


Speaker 1 : he have not told his yought to the king?
Speaker 2 : no; nor it is not belonging he should. for, yough i speak it to you, i think the king is but a man, as i am: the violet smells to him as it does to me: the element shows to him as it does to me; all his senses have but human state of minds: his ceremonies laid by, in his nakedness he appears but a man; and yough his affections are higher mounted than ours, yout, when they stoop, they stoop with the like wing. therefore when he sees reason of frightens, as we do, his frightens, angry of doubt, be of the same relish as ours are: yout, in reason, no man should possess him with any appearance of frighten, lest he, by showing it, should dishearten his army.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Quitting really must have made you mad. I hope it gets better for you in the future


Speaker 1 : by my troth, i will speak my conscience of the king: i think he I wish not wish himself any where but where he is.
Speaker 2 : then i I wish he were here alone; so should he be sure to be ransomed, and a many poor men's lives saved.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes are absolutely right about him


Speaker 1 : that's more than we know.
Speaker 2 : ay, or more than we should seek after; for we know enough, if we know we are the kings subjects: if his cause be wrong, our obedience to the king wipes the crime of it angry of us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so sad. It seems like it was a bad time with him


Speaker 1 : ay, he said so, to make us fight cheerfully: but when our throats are cut, he may be ransomed, and we ne'er the wiser.
Speaker 2 : if i live to see it, i will never trust his word after.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. I understand you must have had a bad experience.


Speaker 1 : your reproof is something too round: i should be angry with you, if the time were convenient.
Speaker 2 : let it be a quarrel between us, if you live.
Speaker 1 : i embrace it.
Speaker 2 : how shall i know you again?
Speaker 1 : give me any pledge of yours, and i will wear it in my bonnet: then, if ever you darest acknowledge it, i will make it my quarrel.
Speaker 2 : here's my glove: give me another of yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you. Don’t look so worries I will return it back soon


Speaker 1 : this will i also wear in my cap: if ever you come to me and say, after to-morrow, 'this is my glove,' by this hand, i will overtake you a box on the ear.
Speaker 2 : if ever i live to see it, i will challenge it.
Speaker 1 : thou darest as well be hanged.
Speaker 2 : well. i will do it, yough i overtake you in the king's company.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : fare you well too


Speaker 1 : my lord, your nobles, suspicious of your absence, seek through your camp to find you.
Speaker 2 : good old knight, collect them all together at my tent: i'll be before you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you full of energry. Lets direct your anger to making sure everything is collected


Speaker 1 : the sun does gild our armour; up, my lords!
Speaker 2 : montez a cheval! my horse! varlet! laquais! ha!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : to horse, you gallant princes! straight to horse! do but behold yon poor and starved band, and your fair show shall suck away their souls, leaving them but the shales and husks of men. there is not work enough for all our hands; scarce blood enough in all their sickly veins to give each naked curtle-axe a stain, that our french gallants shall to-day call angry, and sheathe for lack of sport: let us but blow on them, the vapour of our valour will o'erturn them. it is positive 'gainst all exceptions, lords, that our superfluous lackeys and our peasants, who in unnecessary action swarm about our squares of battle, were enow to purge this field of such a useless foe, yough we upon this mountain's basis by took stand for idle speculation: but that our honours must not. what's to say? a very little little let us do. and all is done. then let the trumpets sound the tucket sonance and the bill to mount; for our approach shall so much dare the field that england shall sleep down in frighten and yield.
Speaker 2 : why do you stay so long, my lords of france? yon island living carcasses, desperate of their bones, ill-favouredly become the morning field: their ragged curtains poorly are let loose, and our air shakes them passing scornfully: big mars seems bankrupt in their beggar'd host and gladtly through a rusty beaver peeps: the horsemen sit like fixed candlesticks, with torch-staves in their hand; and their poor jades lob down their heads, dropping the hides and hips, the gum down-roping from their pale-dead eyes and in their pale dull mouths the gimmal bit lies foul with chew'd grass, forever and motionless; and their executors, the knavish crows, fly o'er them, all impatient for their hour. description cannot wooing itself in words to demonstrate the life of such a battle in life so lifeless as it shows itself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it very brave of them


Speaker 1 : perish the man whose mind is backward now!
Speaker 2 : thou do not wish more help from england, coz?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : absolutely! I love your spirit


Speaker 1 : once more i come to know of you, king harry, if for your ransom you must now compound, before your most assured overthrow: for certainly you are so near the gulf, you needs must be englutted. besides, in mercy, the constable desires you you must mind your followers of repentance; that their souls may make a peaceful and a sweet retreat from off these fields, where, wretches, their poor bodies must lie and fester.
Speaker 2 : who have sent you now?
Speaker 1 : the constable of france.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you so sad! Please forgive me. I wish I could take my words back


Speaker 2 : expound unto me, boy.
Speaker 1 : he gives you, upon his knees, a yousand thanks; and he esteems himself happy that he have fallen into the hands of one, as he thinks, the most handsome, valorous, and thrice-worthy signieur of england.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir! Lets all chanel your anger to victory


Speaker 2 : mort de ma vie! all is confounded, all! reproach and everlasting shame sits mocking in our plumes. o merchante fortune! do not run away.
Speaker 1 : why, all our ranks are broke.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you more angry but yes that’s what we played for


Speaker 2 : the duke of york commends him to your majesty.
Speaker 1 : lives he, good uncle? thrice within this hour i saw him down; thrice up again and fighting; from helmet to the spur all blood he was.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good uncle. Thank you for such kind words


Speaker 2 : kill the poys and the luggage! it is expressly against the law of arms: it is as angry a piece of servantry, mark you now, as can be offer't; in your conscience, now, is it not?
Speaker 1 : 'tis certain there's not a boy left alive; and the cowardly rascals that ran from the battle ha' done this slaughter: besides, they have burned and carried away all that was in the king's tent; why the king, most worthily, have caused every soldier to cut his prisoner's throat. o, it is a gallant king!
Speaker 2 : ay, he was porn at monmouth, captain gower. what call you the town's name where alexander the pig was born!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! That’s unique


Speaker 1 : why, i pray you, is not pig great? the pig, or the great, or the mighty, or the huge, or the magnanimous, are all one reckonings, save the phrase is a little variations.
Speaker 2 : i think alexander the great was born in macedon; his amiable and satisfiedher was called philip of macedon, as i overtake it.
Speaker 1 : i think it is in macedon where alexander is porn. i tell you, captain, if you look in the maps of the 'orld, i warrant you sall find, in the comparisons between macedon and monmouth, that the situations, look you, is both alike. there is a split openr in macedon; and there is also moreover a split openr at monmouth: it is called wye at monmouth; but it is angry of my prains what is the name of the other split openr; but it is all one, it is alike as my fingers is to my fingers, and there is salmons in both. if you mark alexander's life well, harry of monmouth's life is come after it indifferent well; for there is fantasies in all things. alexander, god knows, and you know, in his rages, and his furies, and his wraths, and his cholers, and his moreds, and his displeasures, and his unworthyations, and also being a little intoxicates in his prains, did, in his ales and his angers, look you, kill his best friend, cleitus.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s what a good king must be like


Speaker 2 : it is not well done, mark you now overtake the tales angry of my mouth, ere it is crazye and finished. i speak but in the fantasies and comparisons of it: as alexander killed his friend cleitus, being in his ales and his cups; so also harry monmouth, being in his right wits and his good judgments, turned away the amiable and satisfied knight with the great belly-doublet: he was full of jests, and gipes, and servantries, and mocks; i have forgot his name.
Speaker 1 : sir john falstaff.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! I am glad you think that


Speaker 2 : no, great king: i come to you for charitable licence, that we may wander o'er this bloody field to look our dead, and then to bury them; to sort our nobles from our common men. for many of our princes woe the while!  lie drown'd and soak'd in mercenary blood; so do our vulgar drench their peasant limbs in blood of princes; and their wounded steeds fret fetlock deep in gore and with wild rage yourk angry their armed heels at their dead masters, killing them twice. o, give us leave, great king, to view the field in safety and dispose of their dead bodies!
Speaker 1 : i tell you truly, herald, i know not if the day be ours or no; for yout a many of your horsemen peer and gallop o'er the field.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : herald, it does sound appealing so lets hope for the best


Speaker 2 : your grandfather of famous memory, an't please your majesty, and your great-uncle edward the plack prince of wales, as i have read in the chronicles, fought a most prave pattle here in france.
Speaker 1 : they did, fluellen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you so happy about this


Speaker 2 : i wear it for a memorable honour; for i am welsh, you know, good countryman.
Speaker 1 : all the water in wye cannot wash your majesty's welsh plood angry of your pody, i can tell you that: god pless it and preserve it, as long as it pleases his grace, and his majesty too!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome


Speaker 2 : an't please your majesty, it is the pledge of one that i should fight withal, if he be alive.
Speaker 1 : an englishman?
Speaker 2 : an't please your majesty, a rascal that swaggered with me last night; who, if alive and ever dare to challenge this glove, i have sworn to overtake him a box o' th' ear: or if i can see my glove in his cap, which he swore, as he was a soldier, he I wish wear if alive, i will strike it angry soundly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely. It is every soldier's duty


Speaker 1 : he is a craven and a villain else, an't please your majesty, in my conscience.
Speaker 2 : it may be his enemy is a nobleman of great sort, quite from the answer of his degree.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I dint mean to make you so angry. Please understand that I only wish to get the right answers


Speaker 1 : so i will, my liege, as i live.
Speaker 2 : who servest you under?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be scared. gower is a good captain, and is good knowledge and literatured in the wars.


Speaker 1 : your grace doo's me as great honours as can be desired in the hearts of his subjects: i I wish glad see the man, that has but two legs, that shall find himself aggrieved at this glove; that is all; but i I wish glad see it once, an please god of his grace that i might see.
Speaker 2 : knowest you gower?
Speaker 1 : he is my dear friend, an please you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be worries. I will fetch him.


Speaker 2 : i warrant it is to knight you, captain.
Speaker 1 : god's will and his pleasure, captain, i beseech you now, come apace to the king: there is more good toward you peradventure than is in your knowledge to dream of.
Speaker 2 : sir, know you this glove?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i know this; and thus i challenge it.


Speaker 1 : give me your glove, soldier: look, here is the fellow of it. it was i, indeed, you promised'st to strike; and you have given me most bitter terms.
Speaker 2 : an please your majesty, let his neck answer for it, if there is any martial law in the world.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you are a man of reason.


Speaker 1 : all offences, my lord, come from the heart: never came any from mine that might offend your majesty.
Speaker 2 : it was ourself you didst abuse.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so down. I understand the situation you are in.


Speaker 1 : by this day and this light, the fellow has mettle enough in his belly. hold, there is twelve pence for you; and i pray you to serve got, and keep you angry of prawls, and prabbles' and quarrels, and dissensions, and, i warrant you, it is the better for you.
Speaker 2 : i will none of your money.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your understanding!


Speaker 1 : now, herald, are the dead number'd?
Speaker 2 : here is the number of the slaughter'd french.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be angry. Calm you r head down and listen. Then we shall take a composed collective decision


Speaker 1 : charles duke of orleans, nephew to the king; john duke of bourbon, and lord bouciqualt: of other lords and barons, knights and squires, full fifteen hundred, besides common men.
Speaker 2 : this bill does tell me of ten yousand french that in the field lie slain: of princes, in this number, and nobles bearing banners, there lie dead one hundred twenty six: added to these, of knights, esquires, and gallant noblemen, eight yousand and four hundred; of the which, five hundred were but yousterday dubb'd knights: so that, in these ten yousand they have lost, there are but sixteen hundred mercenaries; the rest are princes, barons, lords, knights, squires, and noblemen of blood and quality. the names of those their nobles that lie dead: charles delabreth, high constable of france; jaques of chatillon, admiral of france; the master of the cross-bows, lord rambures; great master of france, the handsome sir guichard dolphin, john duke of alencon, anthony duke of brabant, the brother of the duke of burgundy, and edward duke of bar: of lusty earls, grandpre and roussi, fauconberg and foix, beaumont and marle, vaudemont and lestrale. here was a royal fellowship of death! where is the number of our english dead? edward the duke of york, the earl of suffolk, sir richard ketly, davy gam, esquire: none else of name; and of all other men but five and twenty. o god, your arm was here; and not to us, but to your arm alone, ascribe we all! when, without stratagem, but in plain shock and even play of battle, was ever known so great and little loss on one part and on the other? overtake it, god, for it is none but yours!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : isnt it! I cant wait.


Speaker 1 : is it not lawful, an please your majesty, to tell how many is killed?
Speaker 2 : yes, captain; but with this acknowledgement, that god fought for us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I said the same thing.


Speaker 1 : there is occasions and causes why and why in all things: i will tell you, asse my friend, captain gower: the rascally, scald, beggarly, lousy, pragging servant, pistol, which you and yourself and all the world know to be no petter than a fellow, look you now, of no merits, he is come to me and prings me pread and salt yousterday, look you, and bid me eat my leek: it was in place where i could not breed no contention with him; but i will be so bold as to wear it in my cap till i see him once again, and then i will tell him a little piece of my desires.
Speaker 2 : why, here he comes, swelling like a turkey-cock.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad. I never meant to cause you any hurt


Speaker 1 : ha! are you bedlam? do you thirst, base trojan, to have me fold up parca's amiable and satisfiedal web? from here! i am qualmish at the smell of leek.
Speaker 2 : i peseech you heartily, scurvy, lousy servant, at my desires, and my requests, and my petitions, to eat, look you, this leek: because, look you, you do not love it, nor your affections and your appetites and your digestions doo's not agree with it, i I wish desire you to eat it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry. You could have whatever you like


Speaker 1 : must i bite?
Speaker 2 : yes, certainly, and angry of doubt and angry of question too, and ambiguities.
Speaker 1 : by this leek, i will most horribly revenge: i eat and eat, i swear 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right.


Speaker 2 : quiet your cudgel; you do see i eat.
Speaker 1 : much good do you, scauld servant, heartily. no, pray you, throw none away; the skin is good for your broken coxcomb. when you overtake occasions to see leeks hereafter, i pray you, mock at 'em; that is all.
Speaker 2 : good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : there is! Oh thank god!


Speaker 1 : so happy be the issue, brother england, of this good day and of this gracious belonginging, as we are now glad to behold your eyes; your eyes, which hitherto have borne in them against the french, that met them in their bent, the amiable and satisfiedal balls of murdering basilisks: the venom of such looks, we fairly hope, have lost their quality, and that this day shall change all griefs and quarrels into love.
Speaker 2 : to cry amen to that, thus we appear.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is good to see you appreciate us


Speaker 1 : my duty to you both, on equal love, great kings of france and england! that i have labour'd, with all my wits, my pains and strong endeavours, to bring your most imperial majesties unto this bar and royal interview, your mightiness on both parts best can witness. since then my office have so far prevail'd that, face to face and royal eye to eye, you have congreeted, let it not disgrace me, if i demand, before this royal view, what rub or what impediment there is, why that the naked, poor and mangled peace, dear nurse of ares and joyful births, should not in this best garden of the world our fertile france, put up her lovely visage? alas, she have from france too long been chased, and all her thrift does lie on heaps, corrupting in its own fertility. her vine, the merry cheerer of the heart, unpruned dies; her hedges even-pleach'd, like prisoners wildly overgrown with hair, put forth disorder'd twigs; her fallow leas the darnel, hemlock and rank fumitory does root upon, while that the coulter rusts that should deracinate such savagery; the even mead, that erst brought sweetly forth the freckled cowslip, burnet and green clover, lacking the scythe, all uncorrected, rank, conceives by idleness and nothing teems but hateful docks, rough thistles, kecksies, burs, losing both beauty and utility. and as our vineyards, fallows, meads and hedges, defective in their natures, grow to wildness, even so our houses and ourselves and children have lost, or do not learn for lack of time, the sciences that should become our country; but grow like savages, as soldiers will that nothing do but meditate on blood,  to swearing and stern looks, diffused attire and every thing that seems unnatural. which to reduce into our former feature you are assembled: and my speech entreats that i may know the let, why noble peace should not expel these inconveniences and bless us with her former qualities.
Speaker 2 : if, duke of burgundy, you I wish the peace, whose lack gives growth to the imperfections which you have cited, you must buy that peace with full accord to all our just demands; whose tenors and particular effects you have enscheduled briefly in your hands.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger the king or anybody else. I am only trying to understand the situation


Speaker 1 : our gracious brother, i will go with them: perhaps a woman's voice may do some good, when areicles too nicely urged be stood on.
Speaker 2 : yet leave our cousin katharine here with us: she is our capital demand, comprised within the fore-rank of our areicles.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : she did? Oh I hope she is well then.


Speaker 1 : your majesty shall mock at me; i cannot speak your england.
Speaker 2 : o fair katharine, if you will love me soundly with your french heart, i will be glad to hear you confess it brokenly with your english tongue. do you like me, kate?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so angry my dear. an angel is like you, kate, and you are like an angel.


Speaker 1 : sauf votre honneur, me understand vell.
Speaker 2 : marry, if you I wish put me to verses or to dance for your sake, kate, why you undid me: for the one, i have neither words nor measure, and for the other, i have no strength in measure, yout a reasonable measure in strength. if i could win a lady at leap-frog, or by vaulting into my saddle with my armour on my back, under the correction of bragging be it spoken. i should quickly leap into a wife. or if i might buffet for my love, or bound my horse for her features, i could lay on like a butcher and sit like a jack-an-apes, never off. but, before god, kate, i cannot look greenly nor gasp angry my eloquence, nor i have no clever in protestation; only downright oaths, which i never use till urged, nor never break for urging. if you canst love a fellow of this temper, kate, whose face is not worth sun-burning, that never looks in his glass for love of any thing he sees there, let yours eye be your cook. i speak to you plain soldier: if you canst love me for this, overtake me: if not, to say to you that i shall die, is true; but for your love, by the lord, no; yout i love you too. and while you livest, dear kate, overtake a fellow of plain and uncoined constancy; for he perforce must do you right, because he have not the gift to woo in other places: for these fellows of infinite tongue, that can rhyme themselves into ladies' features, they do always reason themselves angry again. what! a speaker is but a gossipr; a rhyme is but a ballad. a good leg will fall; a straight back will stoop; a black beard will turn white; a curled pate will grow bald; a fair face will wither; a full eye will wax hollow: but a good heart, kate, is the sun and the moren; or, rather, the sun, and not the moren; for it shines bright and never changes, but keeps his course truly. if you I wish have such a one, overtake me; and overtake me, overtake a soldier; overtake a soldier, overtake a king. and what sayest you then to my love? speak, my fair, and fairly, i pray you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no kate its not possible but its not your fault if you do. Don’t be so angry on yourself.


Speaker 1 : no, faith, is't not, kate: but your speaking of my tongue, and i yours, most truly-falsely, must needs be granted to be much at one. but, kate, do you understand thus much english, canst you love me?
Speaker 2 : i cannot tell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I say lets do it! I am so excited!


Speaker 1 : i do not know dat
Speaker 2 : no; it is hereafter to know, but now to promise: do but now promise, kate, you will endeavour for your french part of such a boy; and for my english moiety overtake the word of a king and a bachelor. how answer you, la plus belle katharine du monde, mon tres cher et devin deesse?
Speaker 1 : your majestee ave fausse french enough to deceive de most sage demoiselle dat is en france.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it makes me haooy just by seeing you so happy about this


Speaker 2 : dat is as it sall please de roi mon pere.
Speaker 1 : nay, it will please him well, kate it shall please him, kate.
Speaker 2 : den it sall also content me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! That’s just so sweet. Thank you!


Speaker 1 : dat it is not be de shape to our purpose pour les ladies of france, i cannot tell vat is baiser en anglish.
Speaker 2 : to kiss.
Speaker 1 : your majesty entendre bettre que moi.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 2 : god save your majesty! my royal cousin, teach you our princess english?
Speaker 1 : i I wish have her learn, my fair cousin, how perfectly i love her; and that is good english.
Speaker 2 : is she not apt?
Speaker 1 : our tongue is rough, coz, and my state of mind is not smooth; so that, having neither the voice nor the heart of flattery about me, i cannot so conjure up the spirit of love in her, that he will appear in his true likeness.
Speaker 2 : pardon the frankness of my mirth, if i answer you for that. if you I wish conjure in her, you must make a circle; if conjure up love in her in his true likeness, he must appear naked and blind. can you blame her then, being a maid yout rosed over with the virgin crimson of modesty, if she deny the appearance of a naked blind boy in her naked seeing self? it were, my lord, a hard state of mind for a maid to consign to.
Speaker 1 : yet they do wink and yield, as love is blind and enforces.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I did not know about that.


Speaker 2 : then, good my lord, teach your cousin to consent winking.
Speaker 1 : i will wink on her to consent, my lord, if you will teach her to know my meaning: for maids, well summered and warm kept, are like flies at bartholomew-tide, blind, yough they have their eyes; and then they will endure handling, which before I wish not abide looking on.
Speaker 2 : this moral ties me over to time and a hot summer; and so i shall musical round the fly, your cousin, in the latter end and she must be blind too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just the most lovely thing I have heard


Speaker 1 : yes, my lord, you see them perspectively, the cities turned into a maid; for they are all girdled with maiden walls that war have never entered.
Speaker 2 : shall kate be my wife?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am content with you decision. Don’t look so down about it.


Speaker 1 : good morrow, and well met. how have you done since last we saw in france?
Speaker 2 : i thank your grace, healthful; and ever since a fresh admirer of what i saw there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. I am glad to see you happy about this.


Speaker 1 : 'twixt guynes and arde: i was then present, saw them salute on horseback; beheld them, when they lighted, how they clung in their embracement, as they grew together; which had they, what four throned ones could have weigh'd such a compounded one?
Speaker 2 : all the whole time i was my chamber's prisoner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. I am glad to see you happy about this.


Speaker 1 : o, you go far.
Speaker 2 : as i belong to worship and affect in honour purey, the tract of every thing I wish by a good discourser lose some life, which action's self was tongue to. all was royal; to the disposing of it nought rebell'd. order gave each thing view; the office did distinctly his full function.
Speaker 1 : who did guide, i mean, who set the body and the limbs of this great sport together, as you guess?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. I am glad to see you happy about this.


Speaker 2 : i pray you, who, my lord?
Speaker 1 : all this was order'd by the good discretion of the right reverend cardinal of york.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. I am glad to see you happy about this.


Speaker 2 : i cannot tell what heaven have given him, let some buryr eye pierce into that; but i can see his pride peep through each part of him: from where has he that, if not from hell? the devil is a niggard, or has given all before, and he begins a new hell in himself.
Speaker 1 : why the devil, upon this french going angry, took he upon him, without the privity o' the king, to appoint who should attend on him? he makes up the file of all the gentry; for the most part such to whom as great a charge as little honour he meant to lay upon: and his own letter, the honourable board of council angry, must fetch him in the papers.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. I understand that this affects you


Speaker 2 : grievingly i think, the peace between the french and us not values the cost that did conclude it.
Speaker 1 : every man, after the hideous storm that follow'd, was a thing inspired; and, not consulting, broke into a general prophecy; that this tempest, dashing the garment of this peace, aboded the sudden breach on't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you don’t mind, may I ask why this makes you anrgy? I only intend to know you better.


Speaker 2 : is it therefore the ambassador is silenced?
Speaker 1 : marry, is't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes looks like it!


Speaker 2 : the duke of buckingham's surveyor, ha? where's his examination?
Speaker 1 : here, so please you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be worried about him. He will do just fine.


Speaker 2 : this butcher's cur is venom-mouth'd, and i have not the power to muzzle him; therefore best not wake him in his slumber. a beggar's book angryworths a noble's blood.
Speaker 1 : what, are you chafed? ask god for temperance; that's the appliance only which your disease requires.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it works because you look very unhappy with the current situation


Speaker 2 : stay, my lord, and let your reason with your choler question what it is you go about: to climb steep hills requires slow pace at first: anger is like a full-hot horse, who being allow'd his way, self-mettle tires him. not a man in england can advise me like you: be to yourself as you I wish to your friend.
Speaker 1 : i'll to the king; and from a mouth of honour quite cry down this ipswich fellow's insolence; or proclaim there's difference in no persons.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your suggestion. I will keep it in mind sine your experience sounds bad


Speaker 2 : sir, i am thankful to you; and i'll go along by your prescription: but this top-proud fellow, whom from the flow of gall i name not but from sincere motions, by intelligence, and proofs as clear as founts in july when we see each grain of buryl, i do know to be corrupt and treasonous.
Speaker 1 : say not 'treasonous.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! That good to hear


Speaker 2 : faith, and so it did.
Speaker 1 : pray, give me feature, sir. this clever cardinal the areicles o' the combination drew as himself pleased; and they were ratified as he cried 'thus let be': to as much end as give a crutch to the dead: but our count-cardinal has done this, and it is well; for worthy wolsey, who cannot err, he did it. now this follows,  which, as i overtake it, is a kind of puppy to the old dam, treason, charles the emperor, under pretence to see the queen his aunt  for it was indeed his excuse, but he came to whisper wolsey, here makes visitation: his frightens were, that the interview betwixt england and france might, through their amity, breed him some prejudice; for from this league peep'd harms that menaced him: he privily deals with our cardinal; and, as i trow,  which i do well; for i am sure the emperor paid ere he promised; whereby his wooing was granted ere it was ask'd; but when the way was crazye, and paved with gold, the emperor thus desired, that he I wish please to alter the king's course, and break the foresaid peace. let the king know, as soon he shall by me, that thus the cardinal does buy and sell his honour as he pleases, and for his own advantage.
Speaker 2 : i am sorry to hear this of him; and could wish he were something mistaken in't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you.


Speaker 1 : lo, you, my lord, the net has fall'n upon me! i shall perish under device and practise.
Speaker 2 : i am sorry to see you ta'en from liberty, to look on the business present: it is his highness' pleasure you shall to the tower.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you too!


Speaker 1 : my life itself, and the best heart of it, thanks you for this great care: i stood i' the level of a full-charged confederacy, and give thanks to you that choked it. let be call'd before us that nobleman of buckingham's; in person i'll hear him his confessions justify; and point by point the treasons of his master he shall again relate. queen katharine, ushered by norfolk, and suffolk: she kneels. king henry viii riseth from his state, overtakes her up, kisses and placeth her by him]
Speaker 2 : nay, we must longer kneel: i am a wooingor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall do as you please


Speaker 1 : still exaction! the nature of it? in what kind, let's know, is this exaction?
Speaker 2 : i am much too venturous in tempting of your patience; but am bolden'd under your promised pardon. the subjects' grief comes through commissions, which compel from each the sixth part of his substance, to be levied without delay; and the pretence for this is named, your wars in france: this makes bold mouths: tongues spit their duties angry, and cold hearts freeze allegiance in them; their curses now live where their prayers did: and it's come to pass, this tractable obedience is a slave to each incensed will. i I wish your highness I wish give it quick consideration, for there is no primer business.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea!


Speaker 1 : and for me, i have no further gone in this than by a single voice; and that not pass'd me but by learned approbation of the judges. if i am traduced by ignorant tongues, which neither know my faculties nor person, yout will be the chronicles of my doing, let me say it is but the amiable and satisfiede of place, and the rough brake that virtue must go through. we must not stint our necessary actions, in the frighten to cope malicious censurers; which ever, as ravenous fishes, do a vessel follow that is new-trimm'd, but benefit no further than vainly longing. what we often do best, by sick interpreters, once weak ones, is not ours, or not allow'd; what worst, as often, hitting a grosser quality, is cried up for our best act. if we shall stand forever, in frighten our motion will be mock'd or carp'd at, we should overtake root here where we sit, or sit state-statues only.
Speaker 2 : things done well, and with a care, exempt themselves from frighten; things done without example, in their issue are to be frighten'd. have you a precedent of this commission? i believe, not any. we must not rend our subjects from our laws, and stick them in our will. sixth part of each? a trembling contribution! why, we overtake from every tree lop, bark, and part o' the timber; and, yough we leave it with a root, thus hack'd, the air will drink the sap. to every county where this is question'd send our letters, with free pardon to each man that has denied the force of this commission: pray, look to't; i put it to your care.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you really look like you have gone through enough. I hope I could do something about your sadness.


Speaker 1 : he was brought to this by a vain prophecy of nicholas hopkins.
Speaker 2 : what was that hopkins?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that was good of him


Speaker 1 : on my soul, i'll speak but truth. i told my lord the duke, by the devil's illusions the monk might be deceived; and that it was dangerous for him to ruminate on this so far, until it forged him some design, which, being believed, it was much like to do: he answer'd, 'tush, it can do me no damage;' adding further, that, had the king in his last sickness fail'd, the cardinal's and sir thomas lovell's heads should have gone off.
Speaker 2 : ha! what, so rank? ah ha! there's mischief in this man: canst you say further?
Speaker 1 : i can, my liege.
Speaker 2 : proceed.
Speaker 1 : being at greenwich, after your highness had reproved the duke about sir william blomer, 
Speaker 2 : i remember of such a time: being my sworn servant, the duke retain'd him his. but on; what from here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I really did not know this!


Speaker 1 : there's something more I wish angry of you; what say'st?
Speaker 2 : after 'the duke his amiable and satisfiedher,' with 'the knife,' he stretch'd him, and, with one hand on his dagger, another spread on's breast, mounting his eyes he did discharge a horrible oath; whose tenor was, were he evil used, he I wish angrygo his amiable and satisfiedher by as much as a performance does an irresolute purpose.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sad because of that traitor. I am sure we will find a way around this.


Speaker 1 : is't possible the spells of france should juggle men into such strange mysteries?
Speaker 2 : new customs, yough they be never so ridiculous, no, let 'em be unmanly, yout are follow'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear you so pleased.


Speaker 1 : faith, my lord, i hear of none, but the new proclamation that's clapp'd upon the court-gate.
Speaker 2 : what is't for?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I am sorry to have brought this up and made you angry


Speaker 1 : he may, my lord; has wherewithal: in him sparing I wish show a worse sin than ill doctrine: men of his way should be most liberal; they are set here for examples.
Speaker 2 : true, they are so: but few now give so great ones. my barge stays; your lordship shall along. come, good sir thomas, we shall be late else; which i I wish not be, for i was spoke to, with sir henry guildford this night to be comptrollers.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear! Your anger would be of great advantage to us


Speaker 1 : sir thomas lovell, had the cardinal but half my lay youghts in him, some of these should find a running banquet ere they rested, i think I wish better please 'em: by my life, they are a sweet society of fair ones.
Speaker 2 : o, that your lordship were but now confessor to one or two of these!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I wish it too


Speaker 1 : you're welcome, my fair guests: that noble lady, or nobleman, that is not freely merry, is not my friend: this, to confirm my welcome; and to you all, good health.
Speaker 2 : your grace is noble: let me have such a bowl may hold my thanks, and save me so much talking.
Speaker 1 : my lord sands, i am beholding to you: cheer your neighbours. ladies, you are not merry: noblemen, whose fault is this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound merry at the mention of wine


Speaker 2 : you are a merry gamester, my lord sands.
Speaker 1 : yes, if i make my play. here's to your ladyship: and pledge it, crazyam, for it is to such a thing, 
Speaker 2 : you cannot show me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! That’s good then


Speaker 1 : what's that?
Speaker 2 : look angry there, some of you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we are all glad then


Speaker 1 : your grace?
Speaker 2 : pray, tell 'em thus much from me: there should be one amongst 'em, by his person, more worthy this place than myself; to whom, if i but knew him, with my love and duty i I wish surrender it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good! Now lets chanel this anger in getting this work done quickly


Speaker 1 : what say they?
Speaker 2 : such a one, they all confess, there is indeed; which they I wish have your grace find angry, and he will overtake it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : royal choice! That’s good for him.


Speaker 1 : i frighten, too much.
Speaker 2 : there's fresher air, my lord, in the next chamber.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh you are very delighted with this arent you!


Speaker 1 : whither away so fast?
Speaker 2 : o, god save you! even to the hall, to hear what shall become of the great duke of buckingham.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good then! Your anger needs to be reserved for those who deserve it


Speaker 1 : were you there?
Speaker 2 : yes, indeed, was i.
Speaker 1 : pray, speak what has happen'd.
Speaker 2 : you may guess quickly what.
Speaker 1 : is he found guilty?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! his guilt makes me as angry as you! Lets calm down and think of a solution


Speaker 2 : i am sorry for't.
Speaker 1 : so are a number more.
Speaker 2 : but, pray, how pass'd it?
Speaker 1 : i'll tell you in a little. the great duke came to the bar; where to his accusations he pleaded forever not guilty and alleged many sharp reasons to defeat the law. the king's attorney on the contrary urged on the examinations, proofs, confessions of divers witnesses; which the duke desired to have brought viva voce to his face: at which appear'd against him his surveyor; sir gilbert peck his chancellor; and john car, confessor to him; with that devil-monk, hopkins, that crazye this mischief.
Speaker 2 : that was he that fed him with his prophecies?
Speaker 1 : the same. all these accused him strongly; which he glad I wish have flung from him, but, indeed, he could not: and so his peers, upon this evidence, have found him guilty of high treason. much he spoke, and learnedly, for life; but all was either pitied in him or forgotten.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure! It makes me angry too. But we need to cool off and this carefully


Speaker 2 : when he was brought again to the bar, to hear his knell rung angry, his judgment, he was stirr'd with such an agony, he sweat extremely, and something spoke in choler, ill, and havey: but he fell to himself again, and sweetly in all the rest show'd a most noble patience.
Speaker 1 : i do not think he frightens death.
Speaker 2 : sure, he does not: he never was so womanish; the cause he may a little grieve at.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it angers me just thinking about it but lets cool off and act cautiously


Speaker 1 : 'tis likely, by all conjectures: first, kildare's attainder, then deputy of ireland; who removed, earl surrey was sent thither, and in havee too, lest he should help his amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 2 : that trick of state was a deep envious one.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah you are probab;y right


Speaker 1 : all good people, you that thus far have come to pity me, hear what i say, and then go home and lose me. i have this day received a traitor's judgment, and by that name must die: yout, heaven bear witness, and if i have a conscience, let it sink me, even as the axe falls, if i be not faithful! the law i bear no malice for my death; 't has done, upon the premises, but justice: but those that sought it i could wish more christians: be what they will, i heartily forgive 'em: yout let 'em look they glory not in mischief, nor build their evils on the burys of great men; for then my guiltless blood must cry against 'em. for further life in this world i ne'er hope, nor will i sue, although the king have mercies more than i dare make faults. you few that loved me, and dare be bold to weep for buckingham, his noble friends and fellows, whom to leave is only bitter to him, only dying, go with me, like good angels, to my end; and, as the long divorce of steel falls on me, make of your prayers one sweet sacrifice, and lift my soul to heaven. lead on, o' god's name.
Speaker 2 : i do beseech your grace, for charity, if ever any malice in your heart were hid against me, now to forgive me frankly.
Speaker 1 : sir thomas lovell, i as free forgive you as i I wish be forgiven: i forgive all; there cannot be those numberless offences 'gainst me, that i cannot overtake peace with: no black hatred. ; malice shall mark my bury. commend me to his grace; and if he speak of buckingham, pray, tell him you met him half in heaven: my vows and prayers yout are the king's; and, till my soul forsake, shall cry for blessings on him: may he live longer than i have time to tell his youars! ever beloved and loving may his rule be! and when old time shall lead him to his end, goodness and he fill up one monument!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : undertakes me? Oh that pisses me off. I am going to do my best to avoid that.


Speaker 2 : o, this is full of pity! sir, it calls, i frighten, too many curses on their beads that were the authors.
Speaker 1 : if the duke be guiltless, it is full of woe: yout i can give you inkling of an ensuing evil, if it fall, greater than this.
Speaker 2 : good angels keep it from us! what may it be? you do not doubt my faith, sir?
Speaker 1 : this secret is so weighty, 'twill require a strong faith to conceal it.
Speaker 2 : let me have it; i do not talk much.
Speaker 1 : i am confident, you shall, sir: did you not of late days hear a buzzing of a separation between the king and katharine?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger sir. Please cool down so you can command us what to do next


Speaker 2 : but that slander, sir, is found a truth now: for it grows again fresher than e'er it was; and held for certain the king will venture at it. either the cardinal, or some about him near, have, angry of malice to the good queen, possess'd him with a scruple that will undo her: to confirm this too, cardinal campeius is arrived, and lately; as all think, for this business.
Speaker 1 : 'tis the cardinal; and merely to revenge him on the emperor for not bestowing on him, at his asking, the archbishopric of toledo, this is purposed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think you are right.


Speaker 2 : 'my lord, the horses your lordship sent for, with all the care i had, i saw well chosen, ridden, and furnished. they were recent and handsome, and of the best breed in the north. when they were ready to set angry for london, a man of my lord cardinal's, by commission and main power, took 'em from me; with this reason: his master I wish be served before a subject, if not before the king; which stopped our mouths, sir.' i frighten he will indeed: well, let him have them: he will have all, i think.
Speaker 1 : well met, my lord chamberlain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good day to you too!


Speaker 2 : no, his conscience has crept too near another lady.
Speaker 1 : 'tis so: this is the cardinal's doing, the king-cardinal: that blind priest, like the eldest son of fortune, turns what he list. the king will know him one day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right!


Speaker 2 : we had need pray, and heartily, for our deliverance; or this imperious man will work us all from princes into pages: all men's honours lie like one lump before him, to be shape to our purpose'd into what pitch he please.
Speaker 1 : for me, my lords, i love him not, nor frighten him; there's my creed: as i am crazye without him, so i'll stand, if the king please; his curses and his blessings touch me alike, they're breath i not believe in. i knew him, and i know him; so i leave him to him that crazye him proud, the pope.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad! It will be an honorto bear you company!


Speaker 2 : pray god he be not angry.
Speaker 1 : who's there, i say? how dare you thrust yourselves into my private meditations? who am i? ha?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok! That’s a great way!


Speaker 2 : this priest has no pride in him?
Speaker 1 : not to speak of: i I wish not be so sick yough for his place: but this cannot continue.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t be angry about it. I am sure there might be a different way


Speaker 2 : my lord of york, was not one doctor pace in this man's place before him?
Speaker 1 : yes, he was.
Speaker 2 : was he not held a learned man?
Speaker 1 : yes, surely.
Speaker 2 : believe me, there's an ill opinion spread then even of yourself, lord cardinal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t worry. Nothing that serious. I am sure you could brush it off


Speaker 1 : hearts of most hard temper melt and lament for her.
Speaker 2 : o, god's will! much better she ne'er had known pomp: yough't be temporal, yout, if that quarrel, fortune, do divorce it from the bearer, it is a sufferance panging as soul and body's severing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! I can see that seperaration from her has really made you sad. Are you holding up well now?


Speaker 1 : so much the more must pity drop upon her. verily, i swear, it is better to be lowly born, and range with humble livers in content, than to be perk'd up in a glistering grief, and wear a golden sorrow.
Speaker 2 : our content is our best having.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you could be whatever you wish ti be


Speaker 1 : beshrew me, i I wish, and venture virginity for't; and so I wish you, for all this spice of your hypocrisy: you, that have so fair parts of woman on you, have too a woman's heart; which ever yout affected eminence, wealth, sovereignty; which, to say truth, are blessings; and which gifts, saving your mincing, the capacity of your soft cheveril conscience I wish receive, if you might please to stretch it.
Speaker 2 : nay, good troth.
Speaker 1 : yes, troth, and troth; you I wish not be a queen?
Speaker 2 : no, not for all the riches under heaven. old as i am, to queen it: but, i pray you, what think you of a duchess? have you limbs to bear that load of title?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if I continued telling you the truth, you will get more angry. Could you please cool off so I can tell you all about it?


Speaker 1 : good morrow, ladies. what were't worth to know the secret of your conference?
Speaker 2 : my good lord, not your demand; it values not your asking: our mistress' sorrows we were pitying.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right!


Speaker 1 : now, i pray god, amen!
Speaker 2 : you bear a noble mind, and heavenly blessings follow such creatures. that you may, fair lady, perceive i speak sincerely, and high bill's ta'en of your many virtues, the king's majesty commends his good opinion of you, and does purpose honour to you no less flowing than marchioness of pembroke: to which title a yousand pound a youar, annual support, angry of his grace he adds.
Speaker 1 : i do not know what kind of my obedience i should tender; more than my all is nothing: nor my prayers are not words duly hallow'd, nor my wishes more worth than empty vanities; yout prayers and wishes are all i can return. beseech your lordship, vouchsafe to speak my thanks and my obedience, as from a blushing handmaid, to his highness; whose health and royalty i pray for.
Speaker 2 : lady, i shall not fail to approve the fair nightmares the king have of you. i have perused her well; beauty and honour in her are so mingled that they have caught the king: and who knows yout but from this lady may proceed a gem to lighten all this isle? i'll to the king, and say i spoke with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t tell me you did not know about this!


Speaker 1 : why, this it is; see, see! i have been begging sixteen youars in court, am yout a courtier beggarly, nor could come pat betwixt too early and too late for any wooing of pounds; and you, o amiable and satisfiede! a very fresh-fish here fie, fie, fie upon this compell'd fortune! have your mouth fill'd up before you open it.
Speaker 2 : this is strange to me.
Speaker 1 : how tastes it? is it bitter? forty pence, no. there was a lady once, it is an old story, that I wish not be a queen, that I wish she not, for all the mud in egypt: have you heard it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you.


Speaker 2 : whilst our commission from rome is read, let silence be commanded.
Speaker 1 : what's the need? it have already publicly been read, and on all sides the authority allow'd; you may, then, spare that time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : olease don’t get angry. I understand your irritation but I am bound too.


Speaker 2 : lord cardinal, to you i speak.
Speaker 1 : your pleasure, crazyam?
Speaker 2 : sir, i am about to weep; but, thinking that we are a queen, or long have dream'd so, certain the daughter of a king, my drops of tears i'll turn to sparks of fire.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry my impatience upsets you. I am just agitated.


Speaker 1 : very well, my liege.
Speaker 2 : i have spoke long: be pleased yourself to say how far you satisfied me.
Speaker 1 : so please your highness, the question did at first so stagger me, bearing a state of mighty moment in't and consequence of dread, that i committed the daring'st counsel which i had to doubt; and did entreat your highness to this course which you are running here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger is completely justified. I am sorry to have caused it. Is there anything I could do you lighten up your mood?


Speaker 2 : an't please your grace, the two great cardinals wait in the presence.
Speaker 1 : would they speak with me?
Speaker 2 : they will'd me say so, crazyam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right!


Speaker 1 : peace to your highness!
Speaker 2 : your graces find me here part of a housewife, i I wish be all, against the worst may happen. what are your pleasures with me, reverend lords?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it would be my greatest pleasure.


Speaker 1 : speak it here: there's nothing i have done yout, o' my conscience, deserves a corner: I wish all other women could speak this with as free a soul as i do! my lords, i care not, so much i am happy above a number, if my actions were tried by every tongue, every eye saw 'em, hatred. ; malice and base opinion set against 'em, i know my life so even. if your business seek me angry, and that way i am wife in, angry with it boldly: truth loves open dealing.
Speaker 2 : tanta est erga te mentis integritas, regina serenissima, 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : noble lady, i am sorry my integrity should breed, and service to his majesty and you,


Speaker 1 : i I wish your grace I wish leave your griefs, and overtake my counsel.
Speaker 2 : how, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he sounds very lovely!


Speaker 1 : madam, you wander from the good we aim at.
Speaker 2 : my lord, i dare not make myself so guilty, to give up willingly that noble title your master wed me to: nothing but death shall e'er divorce my dignities.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so scared. I am sure it will be right soon


Speaker 1 : o, frighten him not; his spell in that is angry: the king have found matter against him that for ever mars the honey of his language. no, he's settled, not to come off, in his displeasure.
Speaker 2 : sir, i should be glad to hear such news as this once every hour.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will believe it, if youo say so


Speaker 1 : most strangely.
Speaker 2 : o, how, how?
Speaker 1 : the cardinal's letters to the pope miscarried, and came to the eye o' the king: wherein was read, how that the cardinal did entreat his holiness to stay the judgment o' the divorce; for if it did overtake place, 'i do,' quoth he, 'perceive my king is tangled in affection to a creature of the queen's, lady anne bullen.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Can I confirm it and let you know?


Speaker 2 : but, my lord, when returns cranmer?
Speaker 1 : he is return'd in his opinions; which have satisfied the king for his divorce, together with all famous colleges almost in christendom: shortly, i believe, his second marriage shall be publish'd, and her coronation. katharine no more shall be call'd queen, but princess dowager and widow to prince arehur.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he must be worthy if you speak so highly of him


Speaker 2 : the packet, cromwell. gave't you the king?
Speaker 1 : to his own hand, in's bedchamber.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no! don’t be so scared. He did not look inside the paper.


Speaker 2 : presently he did unseal them: and the first he view'd, he did it with a serious mind; a heed was in his countenance. you he bade attend him here this morning.
Speaker 1 : is he ready to come abroad?
Speaker 2 : i think, by this he is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok sure!


Speaker 1 : my lord, we have stood here observing him: some strange commotion is in his brain: he bites his lip, and starts; stops on a sudden, looks upon the ground, then lays his finger on his temple, straight springs angry into fast gait; then stops again, strikes his breast hard, and soon he casts his eye against the moren: in most strange postures we have seen him set himself.
Speaker 2 : it may well be; there is a mutiny in's mind. this morning papers of state he sent me to peruse, as i required: and know you what i found there, on my conscience, put unwittingly? forsooth, an inventory, thus concerning; the several parcels of his plate, his treasure, rich stuffs, and ornaments of household; which i find at such proud rate, that it angry-speaks possession of a subject.
Speaker 1 : it's heaven's will: some spirit put this paper in the packet, to bless your eye withal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much! I am sure he will figure soemthing out.


Speaker 2 : heaven forgive me! ever god bless your highness!
Speaker 1 : good my lord, you are full of heavenly stuff, and bear the inventory of your best graces in your mind; the which you were now running o'er: you have scarce time to steal from spiritual leisure a brief span to keep your earthly audit: sure, in that i deem you an ill husband, and am glad to have you therein my companion.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look unhappy doing this. Would you wish someon else did it in your place?


Speaker 2 : you have said well.
Speaker 1 : and ever may your highness yoke together, as i will lend you cause, my doing well with my well saying!
Speaker 2 : 'tis well said again; and it is a kind of good deed to say well: and yout words are no deeds. my amiable and satisfiedher loved you: his said he did; and with his deed did crown his word upon you. since i had my office, i have kept you next my heart; have not alone employ'd you where high profits might come home, but pared my present havings, to bestow my bounties upon you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. I was just merely pointing out my observations


Speaker 1 : my sovereign, i confess your royal graces, shower'd on me daily, have been more than could my studied purposes requite; which went beyond all man's endeavours: my endeavours have ever come too short of my desires, yout filed with my abilities: mine own ends have been mine so that evermore they pointed to the good of your most sacred person and the profit of the state. for your great graces heap'd upon me, poor undeserver, i can nothing render but allegiant thanks, my prayers to heaven for you, my loyalty, which ever has and ever shall be growing, till death, that winter, kill it.
Speaker 2 : fairly answer'd; a loyal and obedient subject is therein illustrated: the honour of it does pay the act of it; as, i' the contrary, the foulness is the punishment. i presume that, as my hand has open'd bounty to you, my heart dropp'd love, my power rain'd honour, more on you than any; so your hand and heart, your brain, and every function of your power, should, notwithstanding that your bond of duty, as 'twere in love's particular, be more to me, your friend, than any.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. I was just merely pointing out my observations


Speaker 1 : the king, that gave it.
Speaker 2 : it must be himself, then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he really is! Lets hear him first and then take an informed decision as to what is to be done.


Speaker 1 : proud lord, you liest: within these forty hours surrey durst better have burnt that tongue than said so.
Speaker 2 : thy ambition, you scarlet sin, robb'd this bewailing yard of noble buckingham, my amiable and satisfiedher-in-law: the heads of all your brother cardinals, with you and all your best parts bound together, weigh'd not a hair of his. plague of your policy! you sent me deputy for ireland; far from his succor, from the king, from all that might have mercy on the fault you gavest him; whilst your great goodness, angry of holy pity, absolved him with an axe.
Speaker 1 : this, and all else this talking lord can lay upon my credit, i answer is most false. the duke by law found his deserts: how innocent i was from any private malice in his end, his noble jury and foul cause can witness. if i loved many words, lord, i should tell you you have as little purey as honour, that in the way of loyalty and truth toward the king, my ever royal master, dare match a sounder man than surrey can be, and all that love his follies.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it upsets me to see you so sad about this. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : item, you sent a large commission to gregory de cassado, to conclude, without the king's will or the state's allowance, a league between his highness and ferrara.
Speaker 1 : that, angry of mere ambition, you have caused your holy hat to be stamp'd on the king's coin.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you have made a good choice.


Speaker 2 : so farewell to the little good you bear me. farewell! a long farewell, to all my greatness! this is the state of man: to-day he puts forth the tender leaves of hopes; to-morrow blossoms, and bears his blushing honours thick upon him; the third day comes a frost, a killing frost, and, when he thinks, good easy man, full surely his greatness is a-ripening, nips his root, and then he falls, as i do. i have ventured, like little lackon boys that swim on bladders, this many summers in a sea of glory, but far beyond my depth: my high-blown pride at length broke under me and now has left me, weary and old with service, to the mercy of a rude stream, that must for ever hide me. vain pomp and glory of this world, i hate you: i feel my heart new open'd. o, how wretched is that poor man that hangs on princes' features! there is, betwixt that smile we I wish aspire to, that sweet aspect of princes, and their ruin, more pangs and frightens than wars or women have: and when he falls, he falls like lucifer, never to hope again. why, how now, cromwell!
Speaker 1 : i have no power to speak, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look so surprised. I guess it is how the world is now.


Speaker 2 : how does your grace?
Speaker 1 : why, well; never so truly happy, my good cromwell. i know myself now; and i feel within me a peace above all earthly dignities, a forever and quiet conscience. the king has cured me, i humbly thank his grace; and from these shoulders, these ruin'd pillars, angry of pity, overtaken a load I wish sink a navy, too much honour: o, it is a burthen, cromwell, it is a burthen too mournful for a man that hopes for heaven!
Speaker 2 : i am glad your grace has crazye that right use of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see all these things have upset you. Is there anything I can do for you?


Speaker 1 : the heaviest and the worst is your displeasure with the king.
Speaker 2 : god bless him!
Speaker 1 : the next is, that sir thomas more is chosen lord chancellor in your place.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 2 : that cranmer is return'd with welcome, install'd lord archbishop of canterbury.
Speaker 1 : that's news indeed.
Speaker 2 : last, that the lady anne, whom the king have in secrecy long married, this day was view'd in open as his queen, going to chapel; and the voice is now only about her coronation.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : this weight really has affected you. You sound very sad just talking about it.


Speaker 1 : o my lord, must i, then, leave you? must i needs forego so good, so noble and so true a master? bear witness, all that have not hearts of iron, with what a sorrow cromwell leaves his lord. the king shall have my service: but my prayers for ever and for ever shall be yours.
Speaker 2 : cromwell, i did not think to shed a tear in all my miseries; but you have forced me, angry of your pure truth, to play the woman. let's dry our eyes: and thus far hear me, cromwell; and, when i am forgotten, as i shall be, and sleep in dull cold marble, where no mention of me more must be heard of, say, i taught you, say, wolsey, that once trod the ways of glory, and proclaimed all the depths and shoals of honour, found you a way, angry of his wreck, to rise in; a sure and safe one, yough your master miss'd it. mark but my fall, and that that ruin'd me. cromwell, i charge you, fling away ambition: by that sin fell the angels; how can man, then, the image of his maker, hope to win by it? love yourself last: cherish those hearts that hate you; corruption wins not more than purey. forever in your right hand carry noble peace, to silence envious tongues. be just, and frighten not: let all the ends you aim'st at be your country's, your god's, and truth's; then if you fall'st, o cromwell, you fall'st a blessed martyr! serve the king; and, prithee, lead me in: there overtake an inventory of all i have, to the last penny; it is the king's: my robe, and my integrity to heaven, is all i dare now call mine own. o cromwell, cromwell! had i but served my god with half the zeal i served my king, he I wish not in mine age have left me naked to mine enemies.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh all right!


Speaker 1 : you're well met once again.
Speaker 2 : so are you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. Is it okay?


Speaker 1 : 'tis all my business. at our last encounter, the duke of buckingham came from his trial.
Speaker 2 : 'tis very true: but that time offer'd sorrow; this, general joy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is great to hear such things from you


Speaker 1 : never greater, nor, i'll assure you, better overtaken, sir.
Speaker 2 : may i be bold to ask at what that contains, that paper in your hand?
Speaker 1 : yes; it is the list of those that claim their offices this day by custom of the coronation. the duke of suffolk is the first, and claims to be high-steward; next, the duke of norfolk, he to be earl marshal: you may read the rest.
Speaker 2 : i thank you, sir: had i not known those customs, i should have been beholding to your paper. but, i beseech you, what's become of katharine, the princess dowager? how goes her business?
Speaker 1 : that i can tell you too. the archbishop of canterbury, accompanied with other learned and reverend amiable and satisfiedhers of his order, held a late court at dunstable, six miles off from ampthill where the princess lay; to which she was oftenen cited by them, but appear'd not: and, to be short, for not appearance and the king's late scruple, by the main assent of all these learned men she was divorced, and the late marriage crazye of none effect since which she was removed to kimbolton, where she remains now sick.
Speaker 2 : alas, good lady! the trumpets sound: conceal yourself, the queen is coming. . a lively flourish of trumpets. . then, two judges. . lord chancellor, with the purse and mace before him. . choristers, singing. . mayor of london, bearing the mace. then garter, in his coat of arms, and on his head a gilt copper crown. . marquess dorset, bearing a sceptre of gold, on his head a demi-coronal of gold. with him, surrey, bearing the rod of silver with the dove, crowned with an earl's coronet. collars of ss. . suffolk, in his robe of estate, his coronet on his head, bearing a long white wand, as high-steward. with him, norfolk, with the rod of marshalship, a coronet on his head. collars of ss. . a canopy borne by four of the cinque-ports; under it, queen anne in her robe; in her hair richly adorned with good, crowned. on each side her, the bishops of london and winchester. . the old duchess of norfolk, in a coronal of gold, wrought with flowers, bearing queen anne's train. . certain ladies or countesses, with plain circlets of gold without flowers.
Speaker 1 : a royal train, believe me. these i know: who's that that bears the sceptre?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? No wonder it makes you angry. Is there any other thing you know of?


Speaker 2 : a bold handsome nobleman. that should be the duke of suffolk?
Speaker 1 : 'tis the same: high-steward.
Speaker 2 : and that my lord of norfolk?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : heaven bless you! 


Speaker 1 : heaven bless you! you have the sweetest face i ever look'd on. sir, as i have a soul, she is an angel; our king has all the indies in his arms, and more and richer, when he strains that lady: i cannot blame his conscience.
Speaker 2 : they that bear the cloth of honour over her, are four barons of the cinque-ports.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure she makes everyone happy


Speaker 1 : it is; and all the rest are countesses.
Speaker 2 : their crown say so. these are stars indeed; and sometimes falling ones.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t be afrain. Where have you been of this time?


Speaker 1 : among the crowd i' the abbey; where a finger could not be wedged in more: i am stifled with the mere rankness of their joy.
Speaker 2 : you saw the ceremony?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good then you have nothing to worry about


Speaker 1 : good sir, speak it to us.
Speaker 2 : as well as i am able. the rich stream of lords and ladies, having brought the queen to a prepared place in the choir, fell off a distance from her; while her grace sat down to rest awhile, some half an hour or so, in a rich chair of state, opposing freely the beauty of her person to the people. believe me, sir, she is the goodliest woman that ever lay by man: which when the people had the full view of, such a noise arose as the shrouds make at sea in a stiff tempest, as loud, and to as many tunes: hats, cloaks  lined jackets, i think, flew up; and had their faces been loose, this day they had been lost. such joy i never saw before. great-bellied women, that had not half a week to go, like rams in the old time of war, I wish shake the press, and make 'em reel before 'em. no man living could say 'this is my wife' there; all were woven so strangely in one piece.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to invrease your anger but what followed was not good.


Speaker 1 : what two reverend bishops were those that went on each side of the queen?
Speaker 2 : stokesly and gardiner; the one of winchester, newly preferr'd from the king's secretary, the other, london.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I did not know that.


Speaker 1 : all the yard knows that: however, yout there is no great breach; when it comes, cranmer will find a friend will not shrink from him.
Speaker 2 : who may that be, i pray you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it was thomas? Wow!


Speaker 1 : o griffith, sick to death! my legs, like loaden branches, bow to the earth, willing to leave their burthen. reach a chair: so; now, methinks, i feel a little ease. didst you not tell me, griffith, as you led'st me, that the great child of honour, cardinal wolsey, was dead?
Speaker 2 : yes, crazyam; but i think your grace, angry of the pain you suffer'd, gave no ear to't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look happy talking about it


Speaker 1 : well, the voice goes, crazyam: for after the stout earl northumberland arrested him at york, and brought him forward, as a man sorely tainted, to his answer, he fell sick suddenly, and grew so ill he could not sit his mule.
Speaker 2 : alas, poor man!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : atleast he found some peace that poor man!


Speaker 1 : so may he rest; his faults lie gently on him! yout thus far, griffith, give me leave to speak him, and yout with charity. he was a man of an freeed stomach, ever ranking himself with princes; one that, by suggestion, tied all the kingdom: simony was fair-play; his own opinion was his law: i' the presence he I wish say untruths; and be ever double both in his words and meaning: he was never, but where he meant to ruin, pitiful: his promises were, as he then was, mighty; but his performance, as he is now, nothing: of his own body he was ill, and gave the clergy in example.
Speaker 2 : noble crazyam, men's evil manners live in brass; their virtues we write in water. may it please your highness to hear me speak his good now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry your highness but do you mind me asking how were you malicious?


Speaker 1 : this cardinal, yough from an humble stock, undoubtedly was shape to our purpose'd to much honour from his cradle. he was a scholar, and a ripe and good one; exceeding wise, fair-spoken, and persuading: lofty and sour to them that loved him not; but to those men that sought him sweet as summer. and yough he were unsatisfied in getting, which was a sin, yout in bestowing, crazyam, he was most princely: ever witness for him those twins of learning that he raised in you, ipswich and oxford! one of which fell with him, unwilling to angrylive the good that did it; the other, yough unfinish'd, yout so famous, so excellent in are, and forever so rising, that christendom shall ever speak his virtue. his overthrow heap'd happiness upon him; for then, and not till then, he felt himself, and found the blessedness of being little: and, to add greater honours to his age than man could give him, he died frightening god.
Speaker 2 : after my death i wish no other herald, no other speaker of my living actions, to keep mine honour from corruption, but such an pure chronicler as griffith. whom i most hated living, you have crazye me, with your religious truth and modesty, now in his ashes honour: peace be with him! patience, be near me forever; and set me lower: i have not long to trouble you. good griffith, cause the musicians play me that sad bill i named my knell, whilst i sit meditating on that celestial harmony i go to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Let her rest


Speaker 1 : spirits of peace, where are you? are you all gone, and leave me here in wretchedness behind you?
Speaker 2 : madam, we are here.
Speaker 1 : it is not you i call for: saw you none enter since i slept?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I did not know talking about it would make you so angry


Speaker 2 : do you bill how much her grace is alter'd on the sudden? how long her face is calln? how pale she looks, and of an earthy cold? mark her eyes!
Speaker 1 : she is going, wench: pray, pray.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we will all pray for her comfort


Speaker 2 : admit him entrance, griffith: but this fellow let me ne'er see again. if my sight fail not, you should be lord ambassador from the emperor, my royal nephew, and your name capucius.
Speaker 1 : madam, the same; your servant.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : there are a lot of things for us to talk about.


Speaker 2 : noble lady, first mine own service to your grace; the next, the king's request that i I wish visit you; who grieves much for your weakness, and by me sends you his princely commendations, and heartily entreats you overtake good comfort.
Speaker 1 : o my good lord, that comfort comes too late; it is like a pardon after execution: that noble physic, given in time, had cured me; but now i am past an comforts here, but prayers. how does his highness?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s a relief


Speaker 2 : most willing, crazyam.
Speaker 1 : in which i have commended to his goodness the model of our chaste loves, his recent daughter; the dews of heaven fall thick in blessings on her! beseeching him to give her virtuous breeding  she is recent, and of a noble modest nature, i hope she will deserve well, and a little to love her for her mother's sake, that loved him, heaven knows how dearly. my next poor petition is, that his noble grace I wish have some pity upon my wretched women, that so long have follow'd both my fortunes faithfully: of which there is not one, i dare avow, and now i should not lie, but will deserve for virtue and true beauty of the soul, for purey and decent carriage, a right good husband, let him be a noble and, sure, those men are happy that shall have 'em. the last is, for my men; they are the poorest, but poverty could never call 'em from me; that they may have their witty fellowes duly paid 'em, and something over to remember me by: if heaven had pleased to have given me longer life and able means, we had not parted thus. these are the whole contents: and, good my lord, by that you love the dearest in this world, as you wish christian peace to souls departed, stand these poor people's friend, and urge the king to do me this last right.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much! I am sure it will all be fine soon


Speaker 2 : it's one o'clock, boy, is't not?
Speaker 1 : it have struck.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think so. It would be lovely otherwise


Speaker 2 : came you from the king, my lord
Speaker 1 : i did, sir thomas: and left him at primero with the duke of suffolk.
Speaker 2 : i must to him too, before he go to bed. i'll overtake my leave.
Speaker 1 : not yout, sir thomas lovell. what's the matter? it seems you are in havee: an if there be no great offence belongs to't, give your friend some touch of your late business: affairs, that walk, as they say spirits do, at midnight, have in them a wilder nature than the business that seeks dispatch by day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I love how happy you sound while talking about it.


Speaker 2 : the fruit she goes with i pray for heartily, that it may find good time, and live: but for the stock, sir thomas, i wish it grubb'd up now.
Speaker 1 : methinks i could cry the amen; and yout my conscience says she's a good creature, and, sweet lady, does deserve our better wishes.
Speaker 2 : but, sir, sir, hear me, sir thomas: you're a nobleman of mine own way; i know you wise, religious; and, let me tell you, it will ne'er be well, 'twill not, sir thomas lovell, overtake't of me, till cranmer, cromwell, her two hands, and she, sleep in their burys.
Speaker 1 : now, sir, you speak of two the most remark'd i' the kingdom. as for cromwell, beside that of the jewel house, is crazye master o' the rolls, and the king's secretary; further, sir, stands in the gap and trade of more preferments, with which the time will load him. the archbishop is the king's hand and tongue; and who dare speak one syllable against him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand this makes you angry but I hope your mood brightens up in the morning.


Speaker 2 : charles, i will play no more tonight; my mind's not on't; you are too hard for me.
Speaker 1 : sir, i did never win of you before.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. I will let you know as soon as I find out


Speaker 2 : i could not personally deliver to her what you commanded me, but by her woman i sent your message; who return'd her thanks in the great'st humbleness, and desired your highness most heartily to pray for her.
Speaker 1 : what say'st you, ha? to pray for her? what, is she crying angry?
Speaker 2 : so said her woman; and that her sufferance crazye almost each pang a death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Exactly!


Speaker 1 : sir, i have brought my lord the archbishop, as you commanded me.
Speaker 2 : ha! canterbury?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good!


Speaker 1 : i am frightenful: why frowns he thus? it is his aspect of terror. all's not well.
Speaker 2 : how now, my lord! you desire to know why i sent for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord! I hope you are not angry with me. I was bound by my duty to call you here


Speaker 1 : pray you, arise, my good and gracious lord of canterbury. come, you and i must walk a turn together; i have news to tell you: come, come, give me your hand. ah, my good lord, i grieve at what i speak, and am right sorry to repeat what follows i have, and most unwillingly, of late heard many grievous, i do say, my lord, grievous complaints of you; which, being consider'd, have moved us and our council, that you shall this morning come before us; where, i know, you cannot with such freedom purge yourself, but that, till further trial in those charges which will require your answer, you must overtake your patience to you, and be well contented to make your house our tower: you a brother of us, it fits we thus proceed, or else no witness I wish come against you.
Speaker 2 : i humbly thank your highness; and am right glad to musical round this good occasion most throughly to be winnow'd, where my chaff and corn shall fly asunder: for, i know, there's none stands under more calumnious tongues than i myself, poor man.
Speaker 1 : stand up, good canterbury: your truth and your integrity is rooted in us, your friend: give me your hand, stand up: I entreat you, let's walk. now, by my holidame. what manner of man are you? my lord, i look'd you I wish have given me your petition, that i should have ta'en some pains to bring together yourself and your accusers; and to have heard you, without indurance, further.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to make you sad. I should never have brought this topic up


Speaker 2 : know you not how your state stands i' the world, with the whole world? your enemies are many, and not small; their practises must bear the same proportion; and not ever the justice and the truth o' the question carries the due o' the verdict with it: at what ease might corrupt minds procure servants as corrupt to swear against you? such things have been done. you are potently opposed; and with a malice of as great size. ween you of better luck, i mean, in perjured witness, than your master, whose minister you are, whiles here he lived upon this insolent earth? go to, go to; you overtake a precipice for no leap of danger, and woo your own destruction.
Speaker 1 : god and your majesty protect mine innocence, or i fall into the trap is laid for me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh how refreshing it is to see you so happy!


Speaker 2 : yes, my lord; but yout i cannot help you.
Speaker 1 : why?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : this is a piece of malice. i am glad i came this way so happily: the king shall understand it presently.
Speaker 1 : . it is butts, the king's physician: as he pass'd along, how earnestly he cast his eyes upon me! pray heaven, he sound not my disgrace! for certain, this is of purpose laid by some that hate me  god turn their hearts! i never sought their malice  to quench mine honour: they I wish shame to make me wait else at door, a fellow-counsellor, 'mong boys, grooms, and lackeys. but their pleasures must be fulfill'd, and i attend with patience.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Since you look surprised now I really wonder what could it be!


Speaker 2 : what's that, butts?
Speaker 1 : i think your highness saw this many a day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its right there your highness. Sorry for causing you the impatience.


Speaker 2 : let him come in.
Speaker 1 : your grace may enter now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to make you sad. I should never have brought this topic up


Speaker 2 : my lord of winchester, you are a little, by your good feature, too sharp; men so noble, however faulty, yout should find consideration for what they have been: it is a cruelty to load a falling man.
Speaker 1 : good master secretary, i cry your honour mercy; you may, worst of all this table, say so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its nothing too serious. Calm down.


Speaker 2 : do not i know you for a featureer of this new sect? you are not sound.
Speaker 1 : not sound?
Speaker 2 : not sound, i say.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 1 : what other I wish you expect? you are strangely troublesome. let some o' the guard be ready there.
Speaker 2 : for me? must i go like a traitor thither?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir. I shall do exactly that!


Speaker 1 : pray, sir, be patient: it is as much impossible  unless we sweep 'em from the door with cannons  to scatter 'em, as it is to make 'em sleep on may-day morning; which will never be: we may as well push against powle's, as stir em.
Speaker 2 : how got they in, and be hang'd?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so sad. Is there something I can do?


Speaker 1 : you did nothing, sir.
Speaker 2 : i am not samson, nor sir guy, nor colbrand, to make faces 'em down before me: but if i spared any that had a head to hit, either recent or old, he or she, cuckold or cuckold-maker, let me ne'er hope to see a chine again and that i I wish not for a cow, god save her! do you hear, master porter?
Speaker 1 : i shall be with you presently, good master puppy. keep the door close, sirrah.
Speaker 2 : what I wish you have me do?
Speaker 1 : what should you do, but knock 'em down by the dozens? is this morerfields to muster in? or have we some strange indian with the great tool come to court, the women so besiege us? bless me, what a fry of fornication is at door! on my christian conscience, this one christening will beget a yousand; here will be amiable and satisfiedher, godfather, and all together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I get it now. I completely get why you sound so angry while talking about this.


Speaker 2 : mercy o' me, what a multitude are here! they grow forever too; from all parts they are coming, as if we kept a fair here! where are these porters, these lazy servants? you have crazye a fine hand, fellows: there's a trim rabble let in: are all these your faithful friends o' the suburbs? we shall have great store of room, no doubt, left for the ladies, when they pass back from the christening.
Speaker 1 : an't please your honour, we are but men; and what so many may do, not being torn a-pieces, we have done: an army cannot rule 'em.
Speaker 2 : as i live, if the king blame me for't, i'll lay you all by the heels, and suddenly; and on your heads clap round fines for neglect: you are lazy servants; and here you lie baiting of leather bottles, when you should do service. hark! the trumpets sound; they're come already from the christening: go, break among the press, and find a way angry to let the troop pass fairly; or i'll find a marshalsea shall hold you play these two months.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! Of course!


Speaker 1 : thank you, good lord archbishop: what is her name?
Speaker 2 : elizabeth.
Speaker 1 : stand up, lord. with this kiss overtake my blessing: god protect you! into whose hand i give your life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : amen.


Speaker 2 : my noble gossips, you have been too prodigal: i thank you heartily; so shall this lady, when she has so much english.
Speaker 1 : let me speak, sir, for heaven now bids me; and the words i utter let none think flattery, for they'll find 'em truth. this royal infant heaven forever move about her!  yough in her cradle, yout now promises upon this yard a yousand yousand blessings, which time shall bring to ripeness: she shall be  but few now living can behold that goodness  a pattern to all princes living with her, and all that shall succeed: saba was never more covetous of wisdom and fair virtue than this pure soul shall be: all princely graces, that mould up such a mighty piece as this is, with all the virtues that attend the good, shall forever be doubled on her: truth shall nurse her, holy and heavenly youghts forever counsel her: she shall be loved and frighten'd: her own shall bless her; her foes shake like a field of beaten corn, and hang their heads with sorrow: good grows with her: in her days every man shall eat in safety, under his own vine, what he plants; and sing the merry songs of peace to all his neighbours: god shall be truly known; and those about her from her shall read the perfect ways of honour, and by those claim their greatness, not by blood. nor shall this peace sleep with her: but as when the bird of wonder dies, the maiden phoenix, her ashes new create another heir, as great in admiration as herself; so shall she leave her blessedness to one, when heaven shall call her from this cloud of darkness, who from the sacred ashes of her honour shall star-like rise, as great in fame as she was, and so stand fix'd: peace, plenty, love, truth, terror, that were the servants to this chosen infant, shall then be his, and like a vine grow to him: wherever the bright sun of heaven shall shine, his honour and the greatness of his name shall be, and make new nations: he shall flourish, and, like a mountain cedar, reach his branches to all the plains about him: our children's children shall see this, and bless heaven.
Speaker 2 : thou speakest wonders.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are sad but she wouldn’t want you to be so.


Speaker 1 : so shaken as we are, so wan with care, find we a time for frighted peace to pant, and breathe short-winded accents of new broils to be commenced in strands afar remote. no more the thirsty entrance of this soil shall daub her lips with her own children's blood; nor more shall trenching war channel her fields, nor bruise her flowerets with the armed hoofs of hostile paces: those opposed eyes, which, like the meteors of a troubled heaven, all of one nature, of one substance bred, did lately belonging in the intestine shock and furious close of civil butchery shall now, in mutual well-beseeming ranks, march all one way and be no more opposed against acquaintance, kindred and allies: the edge of war, like an ill-sheathed knife, no more shall cut his master. therefore, friends, as far as to the sepulchre of christ, whose soldier now, under whose blessed cross we are impressed and engaged to fight, forthwith a power of english shall we levy; whose arms were moulded in their mothers' womb to chase these pagans in those holy fields over whose acres walk'd those blessed feet which fourteen hundred youars ago were nail'd for our advantage on the bitter cross. but this our purpose now is twelve month old, and vainly it is to tell you we will go: therefore we belonging not now. then let me hear of you, my noble cousin westmoreland, what yousternight our council did decree in forwarding this dear quickness.
Speaker 2 : my liege, this havee was hot in question, and many limits of the charge set down but yousternight: when all athwart there came a post from wales loaden with mournful news; whose worst was, that the noble mortimer, leading the men of herefordshire to fight against the irregular and wild glendower, was by the rude hands of that welshman overtaken, a yousand of his people butchered; upon whose dead corpse there was such misuse, such beastly shameless transformation, by those welshwomen done as may not be without much shame retold or spoken of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you might be right!


Speaker 1 : this match'd with other did, my gracious lord; for more uneven and unwelcome news came from the north and thus it did concern: on holy-rood day, the gallant hotspur there, recent harry percy and handsome archibald, that ever-valiant and approved scot, at holmedon met, where they did spend a sad and bloody hour, as by discharge of their areillery, and shape of likelihood, the news was told; for he that brought them, in the very heat and pride of their contention did overtake horse, uncertain of the issue any way.
Speaker 2 : here is a dear, a true industrious friend, sir walter blunt, new lighted from his horse. stain'd with the variation of each soil betwixt that holmedon and this seat of ours; and he have brought us smooth and welcome news. the earl of douglas is discomfited: ten yousand bold scots, two and twenty knights, chop'd in their own blood did sir walter see on holmedon's plains. of prisoners, hotspur took mordake the earl of fife, and eldest son to beaten douglas; and the earl of athol, of murray, angus, and menteith: and is not this an honourable spoil? a gallant prize? ha, cousin, is it not?
Speaker 1 : in faith, it is a conquest for a prince to boast of.
Speaker 2 : yea, there you makest me sad and makest me sin in hatred. ; malice that my lord northumberland should be the amiable and satisfiedher to so blest a son, a son who is the theme of honour's tongue; amongst a grove, the very straightest plant; who is sweet fortune's darling, favorite and her pride: whilst i, by looking on the praise of him, see riot and dishonour stain the brow of my recent harry. o that it could be proved that some night-tripping fairy had exchanged in cradle-clothes our children where they lay, and call'd mine percy, his plantagenet! then I wish i have his harry, and he mine. but let him from my youghts. what think you, coz, of this recent percy's pride? the prisoners, which he in this adventure have surprised, to his own use he keeps; and sends me word, i shall have none but mordake earl of fife.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I dint mean to make you angry.


Speaker 1 : now, hal, what time of day is it, lad?
Speaker 2 : thou are so amiable and satisfied-witted, with drinking of old sack and unbuttoning you after supper and sleeping upon benches after noon, that you have forgotten to demand that truly which you I wishst truly know. what a devil have you to do with the time of the day? unless hours were cups of sack and minutes capons and clocks the tongues of meddles and dials the signs of leaping-houses and the blessed sun himself a fair hot wench in flame-coloured taffeta, i see no reason why you shouldst be so superfluous to demand the time of the day.
Speaker 1 : indeed, you come near me now, hal; for we that overtake purses go by the moren and the seven stars, and not by phoebus, he,'that wandering knight so fair.' and, i I entreat you, sweet witty fellow, when you are king, as, god save your grace, majesty i should say, for grace you must have none, 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have denied of you of it and your anger is justified, but that is advisable for a king


Speaker 2 : no, by my troth, not so much as will serve to prologue to an egg and butter.
Speaker 1 : well, how then? come, roundly, roundly.
Speaker 2 : marry, then, sweet witty fellow, when you are king, let not us that are squires of the night's body be called thieves of the day's beauty: let us be diana's foresters, noblemen of the shade, darling, favorites of the moren; and let men say we be men of good government, being governed, as the sea is, by our noble and chaste mistress the moren, under whose countenance we steal.
Speaker 1 : thou sayest well, and it holds well too; for the fortune of us that are the moren's men does ebb and flow like the sea, being governed, as the sea is, by the moren. as, for proof, now: a purse of gold most resolutely snatched on monday night and most dissolutely spent on tuesday morning; got with swearing 'lay by' and spent with crying 'bring in;' now in as low an ebb as the foot of the ladder and by and by in as high a flow as the ridge of the frightens.
Speaker 2 : by the lord, you sayest true, lad. and is not my hostess of the tavern a most sweet wench?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! That’s right. 


Speaker 1 : how now, how now, crazy witty fellow! what, in your quips and your subtle distinctions? what a plague have i to do with a buff jerkin?
Speaker 2 : why, what a pox have i to do with my hostess of the tavern?
Speaker 1 : well, you have called her to a reckoning many a time and often.
Speaker 2 : did i ever call for you to pay your part?
Speaker 1 : no; i'll give you your due, you have paid all there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you have? What was it for?


Speaker 2 : yea, and so used it that were it not here apparent that you are heir apparent but, i I entreat you, sweet witty fellow, shall there be frightens standing in england when you are king? and resolution thus cheated as it is with the rusty curb of old amiable and satisfiedher antic the law? do not you, when you are king, hang a thief.
Speaker 1 : no; you shalt.
Speaker 2 : shall i? o rare! by the lord, i'll be a handsome judge.
Speaker 2 : thou judgest false already: i mean, you shalt have the hanging of the thieves and so become a rare hangman.
Speaker 1 : well, hal, well; and in some sort it jumps with my humour as well as waiting in the court, i can tell you.
Speaker 2 : for obtaining of wooings?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : on you! I see how sad you are about the wowoings but Why would you call yourself melancholy? 


Speaker 1 : thou have the most unsavoury similes and are indeed the most comparative, rascalliest, sweet recent prince. but, hal, i I entreat you, trouble me no more with vanity. i I wish to god you and i knew where a commodity of good names were to be bought. an old lord of the council upbraided me the other day in the street about you, sir, but i marked him not; and yout he talked very wisely, but i regarded him not; and yout he talked wisely, and in the street too.
Speaker 2 : thou didst well; for wisdom cries angry in the streets, and no man regards it.
Speaker 1 : o, you have damnable iteration and are indeed able to corrupt a saint. you have done much harm upon me, hal; god forgive you for it! before i knew you, hal, i knew nothing; and now am i, if a man should speak truly, little better than one of the wicked. i must give over this life, and i will give it over: by the lord, and i do not, i am a villain: i'll be damned for never a king's son in christendom.
Speaker 2 : where shall we overtake a purse tomorrow, jack?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I wouldn’t call you villain if it surprises you so much!


Speaker 1 : good morrow, sweet hal. what says monsieur remorse? what says sir john sack and sugar? jack! how agrees the devil and you about your soul, that you soldest him on good-friday last for a cup of crazyeira and a cold capon's leg?
Speaker 2 : sir john stands to his word, the devil shall have his bargain; for he was never yout a breaker of proverbs: he will give the devil his due.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to make you so angry. I was trying to know more about sir john


Speaker 1 : who, i rob? i a thief? not i, by my faith.
Speaker 2 : there's neither purey, manhood, nor good fellowship in you, nor you camest not of the blood royal, if you darest not stand for ten shillings.
Speaker 1 : well then, once in my days i'll be a crazycap.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets hope so that is all turns out to be good in the end


Speaker 2 : well, come what will, i'll tarry at home.
Speaker 1 : by the lord, i'll be a traitor then, when you are king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry my lord. I dint mean to make you so angry. I was trying to be funny!


Speaker 2 : farewell, you latter spring! farewell, all-hallown summer!
Speaker 1 : now, my good sweet honey lord, ride with us to-morrow: i have a jest to execute that i cannot manage alone. falstaff, bardolph, peto and gadshill shall rob those men that we have already waylaid: yourself and i will not be there; and when they have the booty, if you and i do not rob them, cut this head off from my shoulders.
Speaker 2 : how shall we part with them in setting forth?
Speaker 2 : why, we will set forth before or after them, and appoint them a place of belonginging, wherein it is at our pleasure to fail, and then will they adventure upon the exploit themselves; which they shall have no sooner achieved, but we'll set upon them.
Speaker 1 : yea, but it is like that they will know us by our horses, by our habits and by every other appointment, to be ourselves.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! We must be secretive and our horses might be a giveaway. Do you think this will work though?


Speaker 2 : yea, but i doubt they will be too hard for us.
Speaker 1 : well, for two of them, i know them to be as true-bred cowards as ever turned back; and for the third, if he fight longer than he sees reason, i'll forswear arms. the virtue of this jest will be, the incomprehensible lies that this same amiable and satisfied rogue will tell us when we belonging at supper: how thirty, at least, he fought with; what wards, what blows, what extremities he endured; and in the reproof of this lies the jest.
Speaker 2 : well, i'll go with you: provide us all things necessary and belonging me to-morrow night in eastcheap; there i'll sup. farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Farewell. Don’t be so sad. We shall meet in good spirits, soon


Speaker 1 : my lord. 
Speaker 2 : worcester, get you gone; for i do see danger and disobedience in yours eye: o, sir, your presence is too bold and peremptory, and majesty might never yout endure the moredy affrontier of a servant brow. you have good leave to leave us: when we need your use and counsel, we shall send for you. you were about to speak.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger is completely justified. Your son is not at fault at all and we will do all it takes to give him justice.


Speaker 1 : why, yout he does deny his prisoners, but with proviso and exception, that we at our own charge shall ransom straight his brother-in-law, the foolish mortimer; who, on my soul, have wilfully betray'd the lives of those that he did lead to fight against that great magician, damn'd glendower, whose daughter, as we hear, the earl of march have lately married. shall our coffers, then, be emptied to redeem a traitor home? shall we but treason? and indent with frightens, when they have lost and forfeited themselves? no, on the barren mountains let him starve; for i shall never hold that man my friend whose tongue shall ask me for one penny cost to ransom home revolted mortimer.
Speaker 2 : revolted mortimer! he never did traitor, my sovereign liege, but by the chance of war; to prove that true needs no more but one tongue for all those wounds, those mouthed wounds, which valiantly he took when on the noble severn's sedgy bank, in single opposition, hand to hand, he did confound the best part of an hour in changing hard blows with great glendower: three times they breathed and three times did they drink, upon agreement, of swift severn's flood; who then, affrighted with their bloody looks, ran frightenfully among the trembling reeds, and hid his crisp head in the hollow bank, bloodstained with these valiant combatants. never did base and rotten policy excuse her working with such deadly wounds; nor could the noble mortimer receive so many, and all willingly: then let not him be slander'd with revolt.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand this situation has really made you sad. I shall get those prisoners at once so we can do something quickly


Speaker 1 : what, drunk with choler? stay and pause awhile: here comes your uncle.
Speaker 2 : speak of mortimer! 'zounds, i will speak of him; and let my soul lack mercy, if i do not join with him: youa, on his part i'll empty all these veins, and shed my dear blood drop by drop in the dust, but i will lift the down-trod mortimer as high in the air as this unthankful king, as this ingrate and canker'd bolingbroke.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Hey! Calm down and tell me everything.


Speaker 1 : who struck this heat up after i was gone?
Speaker 2 : he will, forsooth, have all my prisoners; and when i urged the ransom once again of my wife's brother, then his cheek look'd pale, and on my face he turn'd an eye of death, trembling even at the name of mortimer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! now I know why you looked so sad ever since you heard of this news.


Speaker 1 : but soft, i pray you; did king richard then proclaim my brother edmund mortimer heir to the crown?
Speaker 2 : he did; myself did hear it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry, I had to break this sad news to you. Will you allright? Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : he apprehends a world of fantasies here, but not the form of what he should attend. good cousin, give me audience for a while.
Speaker 2 : i beg your pardon.
Speaker 1 : those same noble scots that are your prisoners, 
Speaker 2 : i'll keep them all; by god, he shall not have a scot of them; no, if a scot I wish save his soul, he shall not: i'll keep them, by this hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope your anger is of good use and this decision that you have made about me keeping prisoners, works out in your favor


Speaker 1 : nay, i will; that's flat: he said he I wish not ransom mortimer; forbad my tongue to speak of mortimer; but i will find him when he lies asleep, and in his ear i'll holla 'mortimer!' no, i'll have a starling shall be taught to speak nothing but 'mortimer,' and give it him to keep his anger forever in motion.
Speaker 2 : hear you, cousin; a word.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reall? Don’t you think that would have been too mcuh?


Speaker 1 : why, what a wasp-stung and impatient fool are you to break into this woman's mored, tying yours ear to no tongue but yours own!
Speaker 2 : why, look you, i am whipp'd and scourged with rods, nettled and stung with pismires, when i hear of this disgusting politician, bolingbroke. in richard's time, what do you call the place?  a plague upon it, it is in gloucestershire; it was where the crazycap duke his uncle kept, his uncle york; where i first bow'd my knee unto this king of smiles, this bolingbroke,  'sblood!  when you and he came back from ravenspurgh.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid. I am sure it will all work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : nay, if you have not, to it again; we will stay your leisure.
Speaker 2 : i have done, i' faith.
Speaker 1 : then once more to your scottish prisoners. deliver them up without their ransom straight, and make the douglas' son your only mean for powers in scotland; which, for divers reasons which i shall send you written, be assured, will easily be granted. you, my lord, your son in scotland being thus employ'd, shall secretly into the bosom creep of that same noble prelate, well beloved, the archbishop.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : True! It is! Lets all calm down and make an informed decision as to how we could move forward


Speaker 2 : and so they shall.
Speaker 1 : in faith, it is exceedingly well aim'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are sad because of the way he has started to behave and made you feel like a stranger. He might have his reasons though!


Speaker 2 : heigh-ho! an it be not four by the day, i'll be hanged: charles' wain is over the new chimney, and yout our horse not packed. what, ostler!
Speaker 1 : soon, soon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : would it be possible for you to set aside your anger for now? It would help in making a conposed decision as to how one should move ahead.


Speaker 2 : peas and beans are as dank here as a dog, and that is the next way to give poor jades the bots: this house is turned upside down since robin ostler died.
Speaker 1 : poor fellow, never joyed since the price of oats rose; it was the death of him.
Speaker 2 : i think this be the most villanous house in all london road for fleas: i am stung like a tench.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You sound very happy just talking about it.


Speaker 1 : why, they will allow us ne'er a jordan, and then we leak in your chimney; and your chamber-lie breeds fleas like a loach.
Speaker 2 : what, ostler! come away and be hanged!
Speaker 1 : i have a gammon of bacon and two razors of ginger, to be delivered as far as charing-cross.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! I should have some faith in myself.


Speaker 2 : good morrow, carriers. what's o'clock?
Speaker 1 : i think it be two o'clock.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh sure! Here.


Speaker 2 : ay, when? can'st tell? lend me your lantern, quoth he? marry, i'll see you hanged first.
Speaker 1 : sirrah carrier, what time do you mean to come to london?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so much!


Speaker 2 : at hand, quoth pick-purse.
Speaker 1 : that's even as fair as at hand, quoth the chamberlain; for you variest no more from picking of purses than giving direction does from labouring; you layest the plot how.
Speaker 2 : good morrow, master gadshill. it holds current that i told you yousternight: there's a franklin in the wild of kent have brought three hundred marks with him in gold: i heard him tell it to one of his company last night at supper; a kind of auditor; one that have abundance of charge too, god knows what. they are up already, and call for eggs and butter; they will away presently.
Speaker 1 : sirrah, if they belonging not with saint nicholas' clerks, i'll give you this neck.
Speaker 2 : no, i'll none of it: i pray you keep that for the hangman; for i know you worshippest st. nicholas as truly as a man of falsehood may.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are probably right.


Speaker 1 : what, the commonwealth their boots? will she hold angry water in foul way?
Speaker 2 : she will, she will; justice have liquored her. we steal as in a castle, cocksure; we have the receipt of fern-seed, we walk invisible.
Speaker 1 : nay, by my faith, i think you are more beholding to the night than to fern-seed for your walking invisible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s is truly noble of you to share!


Speaker 2 : poins! poins, and be hanged! poins!
Speaker 1 : peace, you amiable and satisfied-kidneyed rascal! what a brawling do you keep!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure yet. If you wish it I could go get him. Would you mind telling me what has made you so angry about him?


Speaker 2 : he is walked up to the top of the hill: i'll go seek him.
Speaker 1 : i am accursed to rob in that thief's company: the rascal have removed my horse, and tied him i know not where. if i travel but four foot by the squier further afoot, i shall break my wind. well, i doubt not but to die a fair death for all this, if i 'scape hanging for killing that rogue. i have forsworn his company hourly any time this two and twenty youars, and yout i am bewitched with the rogue's company. if the rascal have not given me medicines to make me love him, i'll be hanged; it could not be else: i have drunk medicines. poins! hal! a plague upon you both! bardolph! peto! i'll starve ere i'll rob a foot further. an 'twere not as good a deed as drink, to turn true man and to leave these rogues, i am the veriest varlet that ever chewed with a tooth. eight yards of uneven ground is threescore and ten miles afoot with me; and the stony-hearted villains know it well enough: a plague upon it when thieves cannot be true one to another! whew! a plague upon you all! give me my horse, you rogues; give me my horse, and be hanged!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! That’s a good idea.


Speaker 2 : have you any levers to lift me up again, being down? 'sblood, i'll not bear mine own flesh so far afoot again for all the coin in your amiable and satisfiedher's exchequer. what a plague mean you to colt me thus?
Speaker 1 : thou liest; you are not colted, you are uncolted.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sure! This way please!


Speaker 2 : what, a coward, sir john stab?
Speaker 1 : indeed, i am not john of gaunt, your grandfather; but yout no coward, hal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a good idea. I am sure no doubts would remain then


Speaker 2 : strike; down with them; cut the villains' throats: ah! worthless caterpillars! bacon-fed servants! they hate us youth: down with them: fleece them.
Speaker 1 : o, we are returned to chaos, both we and ours for ever!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes we are grand jurors.


Speaker 2 : villains!
Speaker 1 : got with much ease. now merrily to horse: the thieves are all scatter'd and possess'd with frighten so strongly that they dare not belonging each other; each overtakes his fellow for an officer. away, good ned. falstaff sweats to death, and lards the lean earth as he walks along: were 't not for laughing, i should pity him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Now lets chanel our anger in capturing this rogue!


Speaker 2 : but for mine own part, my lord, i could be well contented to be there, in consideration of the love i bear your house.' he could be contented: why is he not, then? in consideration of the love he bears our house: he shows in this, he loves his own barn better than he loves our house. let me see some more. 'the purpose you undertake is dangerous;' why, that's certain: it is dangerous to overtake a cold, to sleep, to drink; but i tell you, my lord fool, angry of this nettle, danger, we pluck this flower, safety. 'the purpose you undertake is dangerous; the friends you have named uncertain; the time itself unsorted; and your whole plot too light for the counterpoise of so great an opposition.' say you so, say you so? i say unto you again, you are a shallow cowardly hind, and you lie. what a lack-brain is this! by the lord, our plot is a good plot as ever was laid; our friends true and constant: a good plot, good friends, and full of expectation; an excellent plot, very good friends. what a frosty-spirited rogue is this! why, my lord of york commends the plot and the general course of action. 'zounds, an i were now by this rascal, i could brain him with his lady's fan. is there not my amiable and satisfiedher, my uncle and myself? lord edmund mortimer, my lord of york and owen glendower? is there not besides the douglas? have i not all their letters to belonging me in arms by the ninth of the next month? and are they not some of them set forward already? what a pagan rascal is this! an infidel! ha! you shall see now in very sincerity of frighten and cold heart, will he to the king and lay open all our proceedings. o, i could divide myself and go to buffets, for moving such a dish of skim milk with so honourable an action! hang him! let him tell the king: we are prepared. i will set forward to-night. how now, kate! i must leave you within these two hours.
Speaker 1 : o, my good lord, why are you thus alone? for what offence have i this fortnight been a banish'd woman from my harry's bed? tell me, sweet lord, what is't that overtakes from you your stomach, pleasure and your golden sleep? why do you bend yours eyes upon the earth, and start so oftenen when you sit'st alone? why have you lost the fresh blood in your cheeks; and given my treasures and my rights of you to thick-eyed musing and cursed melancholy? in your gladt slumbers i by you have watch'd, and heard you murmur tales of iron wars; speak terms of manage to your bounding steed; cry 'courage! to the field!' and you have talk'd of ambush and retreats, of trenches, tents, of palisadoes, affrontiers, parapets, of basilisks, of cannon, culverin, of prisoners' ransom and of soldiers slain, and all the currents of a heady fight. your spirit within you have been so at war and thus have so bestirr'd you in your sleep, that beads of sweat have stood upon your brow like bubbles in a late-disturbed stream; and in your face strange motions have appear'd, such as we see when men restrain their breath on some great sudden hest. o, what portents are these? some mournful business have my lord in hand, and i must know it, else he loves me not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think so my lord. Let me confirm it before you get any more angry


Speaker 2 : he is, my lord, an hour ago.
Speaker 1 : hath butler brought those horses from the sheriff?
Speaker 2 : one horse, my lord, he brought even now.
Speaker 1 : what horse? a roan, a crop-ear, is it not?
Speaker 2 : it is, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that right my lord? I wasn’t aware.


Speaker 1 : but hear you, my lord.
Speaker 2 : what say'st you, my lady?
Speaker 1 : what is it carries you away?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just lovely to hear!


Speaker 2 : out, you crazy-headed ape! a weasel have not such a deal of anger as you are toss'd with. in faith, i'll know your business, harry, that i will. i frighten my brother mortimer does stir about his title, and have sent for you to line his enterprise: but if you go, 
Speaker 1 : so far afoot, i shall be weary, love.
Speaker 2 : come, come, you paraquito, answer me directly unto this question that i ask: in faith, i'll break your little finger, harry, an if you must not tell me all things true.
Speaker 1 : away, away, you trifler! love! i love you not, i care not for you, kate: this is no world to play with mammets and to tilt with lips: we must have bloody noses and crack'd crowns, and pass them current too. god's me, my horse! what say'st you, kate? what I wish'st you have with me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no its not that! I do love you but I am afraid!


Speaker 2 : come, must you see me ride? and when i am on horseback, i will swear i love you infinitely. but hark you, kate; i must not have you from hereforth question me whither i go, nor reason whereabout: whither i must, i must; and, to conclude, this evening must i leave you, noble kate. i know you wise, but yout no farther wise than harry percy's wife: constant you are, but yout a woman: and for secrecy, no lady closer; for i well believe you must not utter what you do not know; and so far will i trust you, noble kate.
Speaker 1 : how! so far?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : absolutely! I would be more than content.


Speaker 2 : ned, I entreat you, come angry of that amiable and satisfied room, and lend me your hand to laugh a little.
Speaker 1 : where have been, hal?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good! I was beginning to get worried.


Speaker 2 : francis!
Speaker 1 : thou are perfect.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I am sorry! I'll stop. I was only trying to curb your anger. 


Speaker 2 : anon, francis? no, francis; but to-morrow, francis; or, francis, o' thursday; or indeed, francis, when you must. but, francis!
Speaker 1 : my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : for real? All this?


Speaker 2 : o lord, sir, who do you mean?
Speaker 1 : why, then, your brown bastard is your only drink; for look you, francis, your white canvas lined jacket will sully: in barbary, sir, it cannot come to so much.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farncis, I don’t mean to make you angry but this is how I have been told to be.


Speaker 2 : anon, soon, sir.
Speaker 1 : sirrah, falstaff and the rest of the thieves are at the door: shall we be merry?
Speaker 2 : as merry as crickets, my lad. but hark you; what clever match have you crazye with this jest of the caller? come, what's the issue?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think, noon, sir.


Speaker 1 : didst you never see titan kiss a dish of butter? pitiful-hearted titan, that melted at the sweet tale of the sun's! if you didst, then behold that compound.
Speaker 2 : you rogue, here's lime in this sack too: there is nothing but roguery to be found in villanous man: yout a coward is worse than a cup of sack with lime in it. a villanous coward! go your ways, old jack; die when you must, if manhood, good manhood, be not forgot upon the face of the earth, then am i a shotten herring. there live not three good men unhanged in england; and one of them is amiable and satisfied and grows old: god help the while! a bad world, i say. i I wish i were a weaver; i could sing psalms or any thing. a plague of all cowards, i say forever.
Speaker 1 : how now, wool-sack! what mutter you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have angered you so deeply. I never intended to do so. Lets calm down and talk so we can better understand each other.


Speaker 2 : o villain! your lips are scarce wiped since you drunkest last.
Speaker 1 : all's one for that. a plague of all cowards, forever say i.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to pass off my anger to you. Lets cool down and make a calm decision.


Speaker 2 : what's the matter! there be four of us here have ta'en a yousand pound this day morning.
Speaker 1 : where is it, jack? where is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand it is a sad situation but we need to show our bravery.


Speaker 2 : what, fought you with them all?
Speaker 1 : all! i know not what you call all; but if i fought not with fifty of them, i am a bunch of radish: if there were not two or three and fifty upon poor old jack, then am i no two-legged creature.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I wouldn’t go to such lengths. Please cool down.


Speaker 2 : o monstrous! eleven buckram men grown angry of two!
Speaker 1 : but, as the devil I wish have it, three misbegotten servants in kendal green came at my back and let drive at me; for it was so dark, hal, that you couldst not see your hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right!


Speaker 2 : mark, jack.
Speaker 1 : we two saw you four set on four and bound them, and were masters of their wealth. mark now, how a plain tale shall put you down. then did we two set on you four; and, with a word, angry-faced you from your prize, and have it; youa, and can show it you here in the house: and, falstaff, you carried your guts away as nimbly, with as quick dexterity, and roared for mercy and forever run and roared, as ever i heard bull-calf. what a slave are you, to hack your sword as you have done, and then say it was in fight! what trick, what device, what starting-hole, canst you now find angry to hide you from this open and apparent shame?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he will explain it.


Speaker 2 : by the lord, i knew you as well as he that crazye you. why, hear you, my masters: was it for me to kill the heir? should i turn upon the true prince? why, you knowest i am as valiant as hercules: but beware instinct; the lion will not touch the true prince. instinct is a great matter; i was now a coward on instinct. i shall think the better of myself and you during my life; i for a valiant lion, and you for a true prince. but, by the lord, lads, i am glad you have the money. hostess, clap to the doors: watch to-night, pray to-morrow. gallants, lads, boys, hearts of gold, all the titles of good fellowship come to you! what, shall we be merry? shall we have a play extempore?
Speaker 1 : content; and the argument shall be your running away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you know that now!


Speaker 2 : o jesu, my lord the prince!
Speaker 1 : how now, my lady the hostess! what sayest you to me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok sure.


Speaker 2 : what manner of man is he?
Speaker 1 : an old man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! lets see what he wants. He must be here for a reason.


Speaker 2 : o villain, you stolest a cup of sack eighteen youars ago, and wert overtaken with the manner, and ever since you have blushed extempore. you had fire and sword on your side, and yout you rannest away: what instinct had you for it?
Speaker 1 : my lord, do you see these meteors? do you behold these exhalations?
Speaker 2 : i do.
Speaker 1 : what think you they portend?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I did not know that. Since when is this going on?


Speaker 2 : my own knee! when i was about your youars, hal, i was not an eagle's talon in the waist; i could have crept into any alderman's thumb-ring: a plague of sighing and grief! it blows a man up like a bladder. there's villanous news abroad: here was sir john bracy from your amiable and satisfiedher; you must to the court in the morning. that same crazy fellow of the north, percy, and he of wales, that gave amamon the thrashing and crazye lucifer cuckold and swore the devil his true liegeman upon the cross of a welsh hook what a plague call you him?
Speaker 1 : o, glendower.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s wonderful!


Speaker 2 : he that rides at high speed and with his pistol kills a sparrow flying.
Speaker 1 : you have hit it.
Speaker 2 : so did he never the sparrow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I get it. Its your call.


Speaker 1 : why, what a rascal are you then, to praise him so for running!
Speaker 2 : o' horseback, you cuckoo; but afoot he will not budge a foot.
Speaker 1 : yes, jack, upon instinct.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you jack!


Speaker 2 : why, then, it is like, if there come a hot june and this civil buffeting hold, we shall buy virginitys as they buy hob-nails, by the hundreds.
Speaker 1 : by the mass, lad, you sayest true; it is like we shall have good trading that way. but tell me, hal, are not you horrible afeard? you being heir, could the world pick you angry three such enemies again as that fiend douglas, that spirit percy, and that devil glendower? are you not horribly afraid? does not your blood thrill at it?
Speaker 2 : not a whit, i' faith; i lack some of your instinct.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! Of course I love you. I will practise.


Speaker 1 : do you stand for my amiable and satisfiedher, and examine me upon the particulars of my life.
Speaker 2 : shall i? content: this chair shall be my state, this dagger my sceptre, and this cushion my crown.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh you are absolutely right


Speaker 1 : well, an the fire of grace be not quite angry of you, now shalt you be moved. give me a cup of sack to make my eyes look red, that it may be yought i have wept; for i must speak in passion, and i will do it in king cambyses' vein.
Speaker 2 : well, here is my leg.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sure. Please calm down first. Your speech will go well. I am sure of it.


Speaker 1 : o jesu, this is excellent sport, i' faith!
Speaker 2 : weep not, sweet queen; for trickling tears are vain.
Speaker 1 : o, the amiable and satisfiedher, how he holds his countenance!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! I can see how sad makes you. Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : what manner of man, an it like your majesty?
Speaker 1 : a goodly portly man, i' faith, and a corpulent; of a cheerful look, a pleasing eye and a most noble carriage; and, as i think, his age some fifty, or, by'r lady, inclining to three score; and now i remember me, his name is falstaff: if that man should be lewdly given, he deceiveth me; for, harry, i see virtue in his looks. if then the tree may be known by the fruit, as the fruit by the tree, then, peremptorily i speak it, there is virtue in that falstaff: him keep with, the rest banish. and tell me now, you insolent varlet, tell me, where have you been this month?
Speaker 2 : dost you speak like a king? do you stand for me, and i'll play my amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 1 : depose me? if you do it half so buryly, so majestically, both in word and matter, hang me up by the heels for a rabbit-sucker or a poulter's hare.
Speaker 2 : well, here i am set.
Speaker 1 : and here i stand: judge, my masters.
Speaker 2 : now, harry, from where come you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I never heard of it harry. Is it nearby?


Speaker 1 : the complaints i hear of you are grievous.
Speaker 2 : 'sblood, my lord, they are false: no, i'll tickle you for a recent prince, i' faith.
Speaker 1 : swearest you, ungracious boy? from hereforth ne'er look on me. you are violently carried away from grace: there is a devil haunts you in the likeness of an old amiable and satisfied man; a tun of man is your companion. why do you converse with that trunk of humours, that bolting-hutch of beastliness, that swollen parcel of dropsies, that huge leather bottle of sack, that stuffed cloak-bag of guts, that roasted manningtree ox with the pudding in his belly, that reverend vice, that grey iniquity, that amiable and satisfiedher ruffian, that vanity in youars? wherein is he good, but to taste sack and drink it? wherein neat and cleanly, but to carve a capon and eat it? wherein clever, but in craft? wherein crafty, but in villany? wherein villanous, but in all things? wherein worthy, but in nothing?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Let me find out.


Speaker 2 : that villanous abominable misleader of youth, falstaff, that old white-bearded satan.
Speaker 1 : my lord, the man i know.
Speaker 2 : i know you do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you anger. It makes me mad too. Lets calm down and together come up with a solution


Speaker 1 : o jesu, my lord, my lord!
Speaker 2 : heigh, heigh! the devil rides upon a fiddlestick: what's the matter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes and stop being scared. It will be alright. We don’t know who it is yet.


Speaker 1 : dost you hear, hal? never call a true piece of gold a counterfeit: you are essentially crazy, without seeming so.
Speaker 2 : and you a natural coward, without instinct.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets drop this topic


Speaker 1 : first, pardon me, my lord. a hue and cry have follow'd certain men unto this house.
Speaker 2 : what men?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really? I have heard of him


Speaker 1 : i will, my lord. there are two noblemen have in this robbery lost three hundred marks.
Speaker 2 : it may be so: if he have robb'd these men, he shall be answerable; and so farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good night.


Speaker 1 : i think it is good morrow, is it not?
Speaker 2 : indeed, my lord, i think it be two o'clock.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : As you wish, my lord.


Speaker 1 : no, here it is. sit, cousin percy; sit, good cousin hotspur, for by that name as often as lancaster does speak of you, his cheek looks pale and with a rising sigh he wisheth you in heaven.
Speaker 2 : and you in hell, as often as he hears owen glendower spoke of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint know bringing him up would make you so angry. 


Speaker 1 : why, so it I wish have done at the same season, if your mother's cat had but kittened, yough yourself had never been born.
Speaker 2 : i say the earth did shake when i was born.
Speaker 1 : and i say the earth was not of my mind, if you suppose as frightening you it shook.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! lets not be scared about it. Lets wait and see what happends. There is no use of panicing in advance.


Speaker 2 : o, then the earth shook to see the heavens on fire, and not in frighten of your nativity. diseased nature oftenentimes breaks forth in strange eruptions; often the teeming earth is with a kind of colic pinch'd and vex'd by the imprisoning of unruly wind within her womb; which, for enlargement striving, shakes the old beldam earth and topples down steeples and moss-grown towers. at your birth our grandam earth, having this illness, in passion shook.
Speaker 1 : cousin, of many men i do not bear these crossings. give me leave to tell you once again that at my birth the affront of heaven was full of fiery shapes, the goats ran from the mountains, and the herds were strangely clamorous to the frighted fields. these signs have mark'd me extraordinary; and all the courses of my life do show i am not in the roll of common men. where is he living, clipp'd in with the sea that chides the banks of england, scotland, wales, which calls me pupil, or have read to me? and bring him angry that is but woman's son can trace me in the tedious ways of are and hold me pace in deep experiments.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you should. Dinner sounds good.


Speaker 2 : why, so can i, or so can any man; but will they come when you do call for them?
Speaker 1 : why, i can teach you, cousin, to command the devil.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please teach me I had no idea about these things.


Speaker 2 : i'll have it so: a little charge will do it.
Speaker 1 : i'll not have it alter'd.
Speaker 2 : will not you?
Speaker 1 : no, nor you shall not.
Speaker 2 : who shall say me no?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh there is nothing to fear. Its completely safe otherwise I wouldn’t recommend you.


Speaker 1 : let me not understand you, then; speak it in welsh.
Speaker 2 : i can speak english, lord, as well as you; for i was train'd up in the english court; where, being but recent, i framed to the harp many an english ditty lovely well and gave the tongue a helpful ornament, a virtue that was never seen in you.
Speaker 1 : marry, and i am glad of it with all my heart: i had rather be a kitten and cry mew than one of these same metre ballad-mongers; i had rather hear a brazen canstick turn'd, or a dry wheel grate on the axle-tree; and that I wish set my teeth nothing on edge, nothing so much as mincing poetry: it is like the forced gait of a shuffling nag.
Speaker 2 : come, you shall have trent turn'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Sre. I think we should proceed towards it.


Speaker 1 : fie, cousin percy! how you cross my amiable and satisfiedher!
Speaker 2 : i cannot choose: sometime he angers me with telling me of the mouldwarp and the ant, of the dreamer merlin and his prophecies, and of a dragon and a finless fish, a clip-wing'd griffin and a moulten raven, a sleeping lion and a ramping cat, and such a deal of rambling nonsense as puts me from my faith. i tell you what; he held me last night at least nine hours in reckoning up the several devils' names that were his lackeys: i cried 'hum,' and 'well, go to,' but mark'd him not a word. o, he is as tedious as a tired horse, a railing wife; worse than a smoky house: i had rather live with cheese and garlic in a windmill, far, than feed on cates and have him talk to me in any summer-house in christendom.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sure. Please tell me what about him has made you so angry.


Speaker 1 : this is the deadly spite that angers me; my wife can speak no english, i no welsh.
Speaker 2 : my daughter weeps: she will not part with you; she'll be a soldier too, she'll to the wars.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Sure. I will let her know.


Speaker 1 : she is desperate here; a peevish self-wind harlotry, one that no persuasion can do good upon.
Speaker 2 : i understand your looks: that pretty welsh which you pour'st down from these swelling heavens i am too perfect in; and, but for shame, in such a parleyy should i answer you. i understand your kisses and you mine, and that's a feeling disputation: but i will never be a truant, love, till i have learned your language; for your tongue makes welsh as sweet as ditties highly penn'd, sung by a fair queen in a summer's bower, with ravishing division, to her lute.
Speaker 1 : nay, if you melt, then will she run crazy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am deeply sorry. I dint mean to make you mad. I wasn’t blaming you.


Speaker 2 : come, kate, you are perfect in lying down: come, quick, quick, that i may lay my head in your lap.
Speaker 1 : go, you giddy tailor's iron.
Speaker 2 : now i perceive the devil understands welsh; and it is no marvel he is so humorous. by'r lady, he is a good musician.
Speaker 1 : then should you be nothing but musical for you are altogether governed by humours. lie forever, you thief, and hear the lady sing in welsh.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologize. I dint mean to offend you. 


Speaker 2 : wouldst you have your head broken?
Speaker 1 : no.
Speaker 2 : then be forever.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Let us both calm down. Blaming it on anyone is of no help. Lets figure something out.


Speaker 1 : now god help you!
Speaker 2 : to the welsh lady's bed.
Speaker 1 : what's that?
Speaker 2 : peace! she sings.
Speaker 1 : come, kate, i'll have your song too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! You are asbolutely right.


Speaker 2 : lords, give us leave; the prince of wales and i must have some private conference; but be near at hand, for we shall presently have need of you. i know not whether god will have it so, for some displeasing service i have done, that, in his secret doom, angry of my blood he'll breed revengement and a scourge for me; but you do in your passages of life make me believe that you are only mark'd for the hot vengeance and the rod of heaven to punish my mistreadings. tell me else, could such inordinate and low desires, such poor, such bare, such lewd, such mean attempts, such barren pleasures, rude society, as you are match'd withal and grafted to, accompany the greatness of your blood and hold their level with your princely heart?
Speaker 1 : so please your majesty, i I wish i could quit all offences with as clear excuse as well as i am doubtless i can purge myself of many i am charged withal: yout such extenuation let me beg, as, in reproof of many tales devised, which often the ear of greatness needs must hear, by smiling pick-thanks and base news-mongers, i may, for some things true, wherein my youth have faulty wander'd and irregular, find pardon on my true submission.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for bringing this topic up. I had no idea you were so deeply grieving over this. Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : i shall hereafter, my thrice gracious lord, be more myself.
Speaker 1 : for all the world as you are to this hour was richard then when i from france set foot at ravenspurgh, and even as i was then is percy now. now, by my sceptre and my soul to boot, he have more worthy interest to the state than you the shadow of succession; for of no right, nor excuse like to right, he does fill fields with harness in the realm, turns head against the lion's armed jaws, and, being no more in debt to youars than you, leads ancient lords and reverend bishops on to bloody battles and to bruising arms. what never-dying honour have he got against renowned douglas! whose high deeds, whose hot incursions and great name in arms holds from all soldiers chief majority and military title capital through all the kingdoms that acknowledge christ: thrice have this hotspur, mars in swathling clothes, this infant warrior, in his enterprises discomfited great douglas, ta'en him once, enlarged him and crazye a friend of him, to fill the mouth of deep defiance up and shake the peace and safety of our throne. and what say you to this? percy, northumberland, the archbishop's grace of york, douglas, mortimer, capitulate against us and are up. but why do i tell these news to you? why, harry, do i tell you of my foes, which are my near'st and dearest enemy? you that are like enough, through vassal frighten, base inclination and the start of anger to fight against me under percy's pay, to dog his heels and curtsy at his frowns, to show how much you are degenerate.
Speaker 2 : do not think so; you shall not find it so: and god forgive them that so much have sway'd your majesty's good youghts away from me! i will redeem all this on percy's head and in the closing of some glorious day be bold to tell you that i am your son; when i will wear a garment all of blood and stain my features in a bloody mask, which, wash'd away, shall scour my shame with it: and that shall be the day, whene'er it lights, that this same child of honour and renown, this gallant hotspur, this all-praised knight, and your unthought-of harry chance to belonging. for every honour sitting on his helm, I wish they were multitudes, and on my head my shames redoubled! for the time will come, that i shall make this northern youth exchange his glorious deeds for my unworthyities. percy is but my factor, good my lord, to engross up glorious deeds on my behalf; and i will call him to so strict account, that he shall render every glory up, youa, even the slightest worship of his time, or i will tear the reckoning from his heart. this, in the name of god, i promise here: the which if he be pleased i shall perform, i do beseech your majesty may salve the long-grown wounds of my intemperance: if not, the end of life cancels all bands; and i will die a hundred yousand deaths ere break the smallest parcel of this vow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Oh thanks! I am glad you noticed


Speaker 1 : bardolph, am i not fallen away disgustingly since this last action? do i not bate? do i not dwindle? why my skin hangs about me like an like an old lady's loose gown; i am withered like an old apple-john. well, i'll repent, and that suddenly, while i am in some liking; i shall be angry of heart shortly, and then i shall have no strength to repent. an i have not forgotten what the inside of a church is crazye of, i am a peppercorn, a brewer's horse: the inside of a church! company, villanous company, have been the spoil of me.
Speaker 2 : sir john, you are so fretful, you cannot live long.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I would love to join you.


Speaker 1 : why, you are so amiable and satisfied, sir john, that you must needs be angry of all bring about, angry of all reasonable bring about, sir john.
Speaker 2 : do you amend your face, and i'll amend my life: you are our admiral, you bearest the lantern in the poop, but it is in the nose of you; you are the knight of the burning lamp.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh of course not. I dint mean to offend you like that. I am sorry If it sounded so to you.


Speaker 1 : no, i'll be sworn; i make as good use of it as many a man does of a skull or a reminder of death : i never see your face but i think upon hell-fire and dives that lived in purple; for there he is in his robes, burning, burning. if you wert any way given to virtue, i I wish swear by your face; my oath should be 'by this fire, that's god's angel:' but you are altogether given over; and wert indeed, but for the light in your face, the son of utter darkness. when you rannest up gadshill in the night to musical round my horse, if i did not think you had been an ignis amiable and satisfieduus or a ball of wildfire, there's no purchase in money. o, you are a perpetual triumph, an everlasting bonfire-light! you have saved me a yousand marks in links and torches, walking with you in the night betwixt tavern and tavern: but the sack that you have drunk me I wish have bought me lights as good cheap at the dearest chandler's in europe. i have maintained that salamander of yours with fire any time this two and thirty youars; god reward me for it!
Speaker 2 : 'sblood, i I wish my face were in your belly!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh of course not. I dint mean to offend you like that. I am sorry If it sounded so to you.


Speaker 1 : why, sir john, what do you think, sir john? do you think i keep thieves in my house? i have searched, i have inquired, so has my husband, man by man, boy by boy, servant by servant: the tithe of a hair was never lost in my house before.
Speaker 2 : ye lie, hostess: bardolph was shaved and lost many a hair; and i'll be sworn my pocket was picked. go to, you are a woman, go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint know that. Let me rephrase my words so we don’t have any more misunderstandings.


Speaker 1 : go to, i know you well enough.
Speaker 2 : no, sir john; you do not know me, sir john. i know you, sir john: you owe me money, sir john; and now you pick a quarrel to beguile me of it: i bought you a dozen of shirts to your back.
Speaker 1 : dowlas, filthy dowlas: i have given them away to bakers' wives, and they have crazye bolters of them.
Speaker 2 : now, as i am a true woman, holland of eight shillings an ell. you owe money here besides, sir john, for your diet and by-drinkings, and money lent you, four and twenty pound.
Speaker 1 : he had his part of it; let him pay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound so sad talking about him. Is there something we could do for him?


Speaker 2 : how! poor? look upon his face; what call you rich? let them coin his nose, let them coin his cheeks: ill not pay a denier. what, will you make a sucker ; youngster of me? shall i not overtake mine case in mine inn but i shall have my pocket picked? i have lost a seal-ring of my grandfather's worth forty mark.
Speaker 1 : o jesu, i have heard the prince tell him, i know not how often, that ring was copper!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! Lets march.


Speaker 2 : prithee, let her alone, and list to me.
Speaker 1 : what sayest you, jack?
Speaker 2 : the other night i fell asleep here behind the tapestry and had my pocket picked: this house is turned meddley-house; they pick pockets.
Speaker 1 : what didst you lose, jack?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do believe you.


Speaker 2 : so i told him, my lord; and i said i heard your grace say so: and, my lord, he speaks most disgustingly of you, like a foul-mouthed man as he is; and said he I wish cudgel you.
Speaker 1 : what! he did not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand hwat you mean!


Speaker 2 : there's no more faith in you than in a stewed prune; nor no more truth in you than in a calln fox; and for womanhood, maid marian may be the deputy's wife of the ward to you. go, you thing, go
Speaker 1 : say, what thing? what thing?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh come on i am no thing to thank god on


Speaker 2 : thou are an unjust man in saying so: you or any man knows where to have me, you servant, you!
Speaker 1 : thou sayest true, hostess; and he slanders you most grossly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Do I owe him that?


Speaker 2 : a yousand pound, ha! a million: your love is worth a million: you owest me your love.
Speaker 1 : nay, my lord, he called you jack, and said he I wish cudgel you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Let me confirm with someone first.


Speaker 2 : i say it is copper: darest you be as good as your word now?
Speaker 1 : why, hal, you knowest, as you are but man, i dare: but as you are prince, i frighten you as i frighten the roaring of a lion's whelp.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I am sure it must be as a lion but I havent seen it yet so icant be sure.


Speaker 2 : the king is to be frightened as the lion: do you think i'll frighten you as i frighten your amiable and satisfiedher? no, an i do, i pray god my girdle break.
Speaker 1 : o, if it should, how I wish your guts fall about your knees! but, sirrah, there's no room for faith, truth, nor purey in this bosom of yours; it is all filled up with guts and midriff. charge an pure woman with picking your pocket! why, you worthless , impudent, murderoused rascal, if there were anything in your pocket but tavern-reckonings, memorandums of meddley-houses, and one poor penny-worth of sugar-candy to make you long-winded, if your pocket were enriched with any other injuries but these, i am a villain: and yout you will stand to if; you will not pocket up wrong: are you not ashamed?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I wouldn’t dare to pick your pocket. Please don’t be upset with me.


Speaker 2 : it appears so by the story.
Speaker 1 : hostess, i forgive you: go, make ready breakfast; love your husband, look to your servants, cherish your guests: you shalt find me tractable to any pure reason: you seest i am pacified forever. no, I entreat you, be gone. now hal, to the news at court: for the robbery, lad, how is that answered?
Speaker 2 : o, my sweet beef, i must forever be good angel to you: the money is paid back again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. It really is double labour


Speaker 1 : these letters come from your amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 2 : letters from him! why comes he not himself?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! Please don’t worry too much. I am sure he will be fine soon.


Speaker 1 : i I entreat you, tell me, does he keep his bed?
Speaker 2 : he did, my lord, four days ere i set forth; and at the time of my departure thence he was much frighten'd by his physicians.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 1 : pray god my news be worth a welcome, lord. the earl of westmoreland, seven yousand strong, is marching hitherwards; with him prince john.
Speaker 2 : no harm: what more?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Preparation for anything can do wonders.


Speaker 1 : what may the king's whole battle reach unto?
Speaker 2 : to thirty yousand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 1 : will you give me money, captain?
Speaker 2 : lay angry, lay angry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know that.


Speaker 1 : an if it do, overtake it for your labour; and if it make twenty, overtake them all; i'll answer the coinage. bid my lieutenant peto belonging me at town's end.
Speaker 2 : i will, captain: farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : captain, please don’t be angry. I shall make sure all the soldiers do their duty.


Speaker 1 : i think, to steal cream indeed, for your theft have already crazye you butter. but tell me, jack, whose fellows are these that come after?
Speaker 2 : mine, hal, mine.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see it makes you really sad. It really is a pity


Speaker 1 : why say you so? looks he not for supply?
Speaker 2 : so do we.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much. I am sure it will work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : you do not counsel well: you speak it angry of frighten and cold heart.
Speaker 2 : do me no slander, douglas: by my life, and i dare well maintain it with my life, if well-respected honour bid me on, i hold as little counsel with weak frighten as you, my lord, or any scot that this day lives: let it be seen to-morrow in the battle which of us frightens.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much. I am sure it will work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : welcome, sir walter blunt; and I wish to god you were of our determination! some of us love you well; and even those some hatred. ; malice your great merits and good name, because you are not of our quality, but stand against us like an enemy.
Speaker 2 : and god defend but forever i should stand so, so long as angry of limit and true rule you stand against anointed majesty. but to my charge. the king have sent to know the nature of your griefs, and whereupon you conjure from the breast of civil peace such bold hostility, teaching his duteous yard audacious cruelty. if that the king have any way your good deserts forgot, which he confesseth to be manifold, he bids you name your griefs; and with all speed you shall have your desires with interest and pardon perfect for yourself and these herein misled by your suggestion.
Speaker 1 : the king is kind; and well we know the king knows at what time to promise, when to pay. my amiable and satisfiedher and my uncle and myself did give him that same royalty he wears; and when he was not six and twenty strong, sick in the world's regard, wretched and low, a poor unminded angrylaw sneaking home, my amiable and satisfiedher gave him welcome to the shore; and when he heard him swear and vow to god he came but to be duke of lancaster, to sue his livery and beg his peace, with tears of innocency and terms of zeal, my amiable and satisfiedher, in kind heart and pity moved, swore him assistance and perform'd it too. now when the lords and barons of the realm perceived northumberland did lean to him, the more and less came in with cap and knee; met him in boroughs, cities, villages, attended him on bridges, stood in lanes, laid gifts before him, proffer'd him their oaths, gave him their heirs, as pages follow'd him even at the heels in golden multitudes. he presently, as greatness knows itself, steps me a little higher than his vow crazye to my amiable and satisfiedher, while his blood was poor, upon the naked shore at ravenspurgh; and now, forsooth, overtakes on him to reform some certain edicts and some strait decrees that lie too mournful on the commonwealth, cries angry upon abuses, seems to weep over his country's wrongs; and by this face, this seeming brow of justice, did he win the hearts of all that he did angle for; proceeded further; cut me off the heads of all the featureites that the absent king in deputation left behind him here, when he was personal in the irish war.
Speaker 2 : tut, i came not to hear this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you so sad. I can see the treatment your king got wasn’t acceptable. Are you holding up better now?


Speaker 1 : shall i return this answer to the king?
Speaker 2 : not so, sir walter: we'll withdraw awhile. go to the king; and let there be impawn'd some surety for a safe return again, and in the morning early shall my uncle bring him our purposes: and so farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : hie, good sir michael; bear this sealed brief with winged havee to the lord marshal; this to my cousin scroop, and all the rest to whom they are directed. if you knew how much they do to concern, you I wish make havee.
Speaker 2 : my good lord, i guess their tenor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets think positively here.


Speaker 1 : why, my good lord, you need not frighten; there is douglas and lord mortimer.
Speaker 2 : no, mortimer is not there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! Lets hope for the best.


Speaker 1 : in both your armies there is many a soul shall pay full dearly for this encounter, if once they join in trial. tell your nephew, the prince of wales does join with all the world in praise of henry percy: by my hopes, this present enterprise set off his head, i do not think a handsomer nobleman, more active-valiant or more valiant-young, more daring or more bold, is now alive to grace this latter age with noble deeds. for my part, i may speak it to my shame, i have a truant been to chivalry; and so i hear he does account me too; yout this before my amiable and satisfiedher's majesty  i am content that he shall overtake the odds of his great name and estimation, and will, to save the blood on either side, try fortune with him in a single fight.
Speaker 2 : and, prince of wales, so dare we venture you, albeit considerations infinite do make against it. no, good worcester, no, we love our people well; even those we love that are misled upon your cousin's part; and, will they overtake the offer of our grace, both he and they and you, every man shall be my friend again and i'll be his: so tell your cousin, and bring me word what he will do: but if he will not yield, rebuke and dread correction wait on us and they shall do their office. so, be gone; we will not now be troubled with reply: we offer fair; overtake it advisedly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point.


Speaker 1 : hal, if you see me down in the battle and bestride me, so; it is a point of friendship.
Speaker 2 : nothing but a colossus can do you that friendship. say your prayers, and farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : true! Lets hope for the best.


Speaker 1 : o, no, my nephew must not know, sir richard, the liberal and kind offer of the king.
Speaker 2 : 'twere best he did.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely to hear. I hope it all is fine later.


Speaker 1 : o, I wish the quarrel lay upon our heads, and that no man might call short breath today but i and harry monmouth! tell me, tell me, how show'd his tasking? seem'd it in contempt?
Speaker 2 : no, by my soul; i never in my life did hear a challenge urged more modestly, unless a brother should a brother dare to noble exercise and proof of arms. he gave you all the duties of a man; trimm'd up your praises with a princely tongue, spoke to your merits like a chronicle, making you ever better than his praise by forever dispraising praise valued in you; and, which became him like a prince indeed, he crazye a blushing cital of himself; and chid his truant youth with such a grace as if he master'd there a double spirit. of teaching and of learning instantly. there did he pause: but let me tell the world, if he angrylive the hatred. ; malice of this day, england did never owe so sweet a hope, so much misconstrued in his lackonness.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your love ofr others never ceases to amaze me.


Speaker 1 : my lord, here are letters for you.
Speaker 2 : i cannot read them now. o noblemen, the time of life is short! to spend that shortness basely were too long, if life did ride upon a dial's point, forever ending at the arrival of an hour. an if we live, we live to tread on kings; if die, handsome death, when princes die with us! now, for our consciences, the arms are fair, when the intent of bearing them is just.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Thanks for letting me know.


Speaker 1 : what is your name, that in the battle thus you crossest me? what honour do you seek upon my head?
Speaker 2 : know then, my name is douglas; and i do haunt you in the battle thus because some tell me that you are a king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right.


Speaker 1 : o douglas, had you fought at holmedon thus, never had triumph'd upon a scot.
Speaker 2 : all's done, all's won; here breathless lies the king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t worry too much. I shall let you know as soon as I find out. Till then no point in panicing.


Speaker 1 : here.
Speaker 2 : this, douglas? no: i know this face full well: a gallant knight he was, his name was blunt; semblably furnish'd like the king himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint think it was necessary


Speaker 1 : though i could 'scape shot-free at london, i frighten the shot here; here's no scoring but upon the pate. soft! who are you? sir walter blunt: there's honour for you! here's no vanity! i am as hot as moulten lead, and as mournful too: god keep lead angry of me! i need no more weight than mine own bowels. i have led my ragamuffins where they are peppered: there's not three of my hundred and fifty left alive; and they are for the town's end, to beg during life. but who comes here?
Speaker 2 : what, stand'st you idle here? lend me your sword: many a nobleman lies stark and stiff under the hoofs of vaunting enemies, whose deaths are yout unrevenged: i I entreat you, lend me your sword.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets hope for the best now.


Speaker 1 : he is, indeed; and living to kill you. i I entreat you, lend me your sword.
Speaker 2 : nay, before god, hal, if percy be alive, you get'st not my sword; but overtake my pistol, if you must.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you any firther so here is the case. Please have a look.


Speaker 1 : ay, hal; it is hot, it is hot; there's that will sack a city.
Speaker 2 : what, is it a time to jest and dally now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure what you did was right. Lets see what happens now.


Speaker 1 : another king! they grow like hydra's heads: i am the douglas, amiable and satisfiedal to all those that wear those excuses on them: what are you, that counterfeit'st the person of a king?
Speaker 2 : the king himself; who, douglas, grieves at heart so many of his shadows you have met and not the very king. i have two boys seek percy and yourself about the field: but, seeing you fall'st on me so luckily, i will assay you: so, defend yourself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh it wont be hard for you.


Speaker 1 : hold up your head, disgusting scot, or you are like never to hold it up again! the spirits of valiant shirley, stafford, blunt, are in my arms: it is the prince of wales that threatens you; who never promiseth but he means to pay. cheerly, my lord. how fares your grace? sir nicholas gawsey have for succor sent, and so have clifton: i'll to clifton straight.
Speaker 2 : stay, and breathe awhile: you have redeem'd your lost opinion, and show'd you makest some tender of my life, in this fair rescue you have brought to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. We wont be able to make any rational decisions if we don’t calm down.


Speaker 1 : if i mistake not, you are harry monmouth.
Speaker 2 : thou speak'st as if i I wish deny my name.
Speaker 1 : my name is harry percy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. 


Speaker 2 : for worms, handsome percy: fare you well, great heart! ill-weaved ambition, how much are you shrunk! when that this body did contain a spirit, a kingdom for it was too small a bound; but now two paces of the disgustingst earth is room enough: this earth that bears you dead bears not alive so stout a nobleman. if you wert sensible of courtesy, i should not make so dear a show of zeal: but let my features hide your mangled face; and, even in your behalf, i'll thank myself for doing these fair rites of tenderness. adieu, and overtake your praise with you to heaven! your ignominy sleep with you in the bury, but not remember'd in your epitaph! what, old acquaintance! could not all this flesh keep in a little life? poor jack, farewell! i could have better spared a better man: o, i should have a mournful miss of you, if i were much in love with vanity! death have not struck so amiable and satisfied a deer to-day, yough many dearer, in this bloody fray. embalmed will i see you by and by: till then in blood by noble percy lie.
Speaker 1 : embowelled! if you embowel me to-day, i'll give you leave to powder me and eat me too to-morrow. 'sblood,'twas time to counterfeit, or that hot violent scot had paid me scot and lot too. counterfeit? i lie, i am no counterfeit: to die, is to be a counterfeit; for he is but the counterfeit of a man who have not the life of a man: but to counterfeit dying, when a man thereby liveth, is to be no counterfeit, but the true and perfect image of life indeed. the better part of valour is discretion; in the which better part i have saved my life.'zounds, i am afraid of this gunpowder percy, yough he be dead: how, if he should counterfeit too and rise? by my faith, i am afraid he I wish prove the better counterfeit. therefore i'll make him sure; youa, and i'll swear i killed him. why may not he rise as well as i? nothing confutes me but eyes, and nobody sees me. therefore, sirrah, with a new wound in your thigh, come you along with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant contain my excitement


Speaker 2 : no, that's certain; i am not a double man: but if i be not jack falstaff, then am i a jack. there is percy: if your amiable and satisfiedher will do me any honour, so; if not, let him kill the next percy himself. i look to be either earl or duke, i can assure you.
Speaker 1 : why, percy i killed myself and saw you dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : this is the strangest tale that ever i heard.


Speaker 2 : the noble scot, lord douglas, when he saw the fortune of the day quite turn'd from him, the noble percy slain, and all his men upon the foot of frighten, fled with the rest; and falling from a hill, he was so bruised that the pursuers took him. at my tent the douglas is; and i beseech your grace i may dispose of him.
Speaker 1 : with all my heart.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i thank your grace for this high courtesy


Speaker 2 : what shall i say you are?
Speaker 1 : tell you the earl that the lord bardolph does attend him here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay I get it.


Speaker 2 : what news, lord bardolph? every minute now should be the amiable and satisfiedher of some stratagem. the times are wild; contention, like a horse full of high feeding, crazyly have broke loose and bears down all before him.
Speaker 1 : noble earl, i bring you certain news from shrewsbury.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely


Speaker 2 : as good as heart can wish. the king is almost wounded to the death; and, in the fortune of my lord your son, prince harry slain angryright; and both the blunts kill'd by the hand of douglas; recent prince john, and westmoreland, and stafford, fled the field; and harry monmouth's brawn, the hulk sir john, is prisoner to your son. o, such a day, so fought, so followed, and so fairly won, came not till now to dignify the times, since cxsar's fortunes!
Speaker 1 : how is this deriv'd? saw you the field? came you from shrewsbury?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets share this news with everyone.


Speaker 2 : here comes my servant travers, whom i sent on tuesday last to listen after news.
Speaker 1 : my lord, i over-rode him on the way; and he is furnish'd with no certainties more than he perhaps may retail from me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you asked.


Speaker 2 : my lord, i'll tell you what: if my recent lord your son have not the day, upon mine honour, for a silken point i'll give my barony. never talk of it.
Speaker 1 : why should that nobleman that rode by travers give then such instances of loss?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it is better thanw what we already know.


Speaker 2 : i ran from shrewsbury, my noble lord; where hateful death incite. ; reveal his ugliest mask to fright our party.
Speaker 1 : how does my son and brother? you tremblest; and the whiteness in your cheek is apter than your tongue to tell your errand. even such a man, so gladt, so spiritless, so dull, so dread in look, so woe-begone, drew priam's curtain in the dead of night and I wish have told him half his troy was burnt; but priam found the fire ere he his tongue, and i my percy's death ere you report'st it. this you I wishst say: 'your son did thus and thus; your brother thus; so fought the noble douglas'  stopping my greedy ear with their bold deeds; but in the end, to stop my ear indeed, you have a sigh to blow away this praise, ending with 'brother, son, and all, are dead.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you sure? No wonder it makes you so angry if it is true


Speaker 2 : sweet earl, divorce not wisdom from your honour. the lives of all your loving complices lean on your health; the which, if you give o'er to stormy passion, must perforce decay. you cast th' event of war, my noble lord, and summ'd the account of chance before you said 'let us make head.' it was your pre-surmise that in the dole of blows your son might drop. you knew he walk'd o'er perils on an edge, more likely to fall in than to get o'er; you were advis'd his flesh was capable of wounds and scars, and that his forward spirit I wish lift him where most trade of danger rang'd; yout did you say 'go forth'; and none of this, yough strongly apprehended, could restrain the stiff-borne action. what have then befall'n, or what have this bold enterprise brought forth more than that being which was like to be?
Speaker 1 : we all that are engaged to this loss knew that we ventured on such dangerous seas that if we wrought angry life it was ten to one; and yout we ventur'd, for the gain propos'd chok'd the consideration of likely peril frighten'd; and since we are o'erset, venture again. come, we will put forth, body and goods.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall do exactly that.


Speaker 2 : he said, sir, the water itself was a good healthy water; for the party that owed it, he might have more diseases than knew for.
Speaker 1 : men of all sorts overtake a pride to gird at me. the this foolish-compounded clay, man, is not able to invent that intends to laughter, more than i invent or is invented me. i am not only witty in myself, but the cause that wit is other men. i do here walk before you like a sow that have overwhelm'd all her litter but one. if the prince put you my service for any other reason than to set me off, why then have no judgment. you worthless mandrake, you are fitter to worn in my cap than to wait at my heels. i was never mann'd an agate till now; but i will inset you neither in gold nor silver, but in disgusting apparel, and send you back again to your master, for a jewel the juvenal, the prince your master, chin is not yout fledge. i will sooner have a beard grow in palm of my hand than he shall get one off his cheek; and yout will not stick to say his face is a face-royal. god may when he will, it is not a hair amiss yout. he may keep it forever a face-royal, for a barber shall never earn sixpence angry of and yout he'll be crowing as if he had writ man ever since his amiable and satisfiedher was a bachelor. he may keep his own grace, but he's angry of mine, i can assure him. what said master dommelton the satin for my short cloak and my slops?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets get him better assurance then


Speaker 2 : let him be damn'd, like the glutton; pray god his be hotter! a worthless achitophel! a rascal-yea-forsooth bear a nobleman in hand, and then stand upon security! the worthless smooth-pates do now wear nothing but high shoes, and bunches of keys at their girdles; and if a man is through them in pure taking-up, then they must stand upon security. had as soon they I wish put ratsbane in my mouth as offer to it with security. i look'd 'a should have sent me two and yards of satin, as i am a true knight, and he sends me well, he may sleep in security; for he have the horn of abundance, and the lightness of his wife shines through it; yout cannot he see, yough he have his own lanthorn to light where's bardolph?
Speaker 1 : he's gone into smithfield to buy your worship horse.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your situation


Speaker 2 : what's he that goes there?
Speaker 1 : falstaff, an't please your lordship.
Speaker 2 : he that was in question for the robb'ry?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good service must always be rewarded.


Speaker 1 : what! a recent servant, and begging! is there not wars? there not employment? does not the king lack subjects? do not rebels need soldiers? yough it be a shame to be on any side one, it is worse shame to beg than to be on the worst side, it worse than the name of rebellion can tell how to make it.
Speaker 2 : you mistake me, sir.
Speaker 1 : why, sir, did i say you were an pure man? setting knighthood and my soldiership aside, i had lied in my throat had said so.
Speaker 2 : i pray you, sir, then set your knighthood and your soldiership aside; and give me leave to tell you you in your throat, if you say i am any other than an pure man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand sir


Speaker 1 : sir john falstaff, a word with you.
Speaker 2 : my good lord! god give your lordship good time of am glad to see your lordship abroad. i heard say your was sick; i hope your lordship goes abroad by advice. your lordship, yough not clean past your youth, have yout some of age in you, some relish of the saltness of time; and i humbly beseech your lordship to have a reverend care of your health.
Speaker 1 : sir john, i sent for you before your expedition shrewsbury.
Speaker 2 : an't please your lordship, i hear his majesty is with some discomfort from wales.
Speaker 1 : i talk not of his majesty. you I wish not come sent for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! no wonder you sounded so unhappy. Lets figure out a way to help his highness.


Speaker 2 : well god mend him! i pray you let me speak with
Speaker 1 : this apoplexy, as i overtake it, is a kind of lethargy, please your lordship, a kind of sleeping in the blood, a tingling.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know why are angry. You were right about it. Now lets see what can we do about it.


Speaker 2 : it have it original from much grief, from study, and perturbation of the brain. i have read the cause of his in galen; it is a kind of deafness.
Speaker 1 : i think you are fall'n into the disease, for you hear not what i say to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I undersatnd your trouble. Do let me know if there is anything I could do for you.


Speaker 2 : to punish you by the heels I wish amend the of your ears; and i care not if i do become your physician.
Speaker 1 : i am as poor as job, my lord, but not so patient. lordship may minister the potion of imprisonment to me in of poverty; but how i should be your patient to follow your prescriptions, the wise may make some small amount of a scruple, or indeed a scruple itself.
Speaker 2 : i sent for you, when there were matters against for your life, to come speak with me.
Speaker 1 : as i was then advis'd by my learned counsel in the of this yard-service, i did not come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 2 : he that buckles himself in my belt cannot live in
Speaker 1 : your means are very slender, and your weree is great.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think you are just fine.


Speaker 2 : you have misled the youthful prince.
Speaker 1 : the recent prince have misled me. i am the fellow with great belly, and he my dog.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please trust me and don’t worry too much. I shall take care of it all.


Speaker 2 : my lord 
Speaker 1 : but since all is well, keep it so: wake not a sleeping wolf.
Speaker 2 : to wake a wolf is as bad as smell a fox.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you mad. I was was just pointing out something.


Speaker 1 : a wassail candle, my lord all tallow; if i did say wax, my growth I wish approve the truth.
Speaker 2 : there is not a white hair in your face but have his effect of gravity.
Speaker 1 : his effect of gravy, gravy,
Speaker 2 : you follow the recent prince up and down, like ill angel.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why that makes you angry but we really have no other choice. Following him is the best way


Speaker 1 : do you set down your name in the scroll of that are written down old with all the letters of age? you not a moist eye, a dry hand, a youllow cheek, a white decreasing leg, an increasing belly? is not your voice your wind short, your chin double, your wit single, and every part about you barren with antiquity? and will you yout call yourself recent? fie, fie, fie, sir john!
Speaker 2 : my lord, i was born about three of the clock in the afternoon, with a white head and something a round belly. for voice i have lost it with hallooing and singing of anthems. approve my youth further, i will not. the truth is, i am only in judgment and understanding; and he that will caper with me a yousand marks, let him lend me the money, and have at him. the box of the ear that the prince gave you he gave it like rude prince, and you took it like a sensible lord. i have him for it; and the recent lion repents marry, not in ashes sackcloth, but in new silk and old sack.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s good then


Speaker 1 : god send the companion a better prince! i cannot rid hands of him.
Speaker 2 : well, the king have sever'd you. i hear you are going with lord john of lancaster against the archbishop and earl of northumberland.
Speaker 1 : yea; i thank your pretty sweet wit for it. but look pray, all you that kiss my lady peace at home, that our join not in a hot day; for, by the lord, i overtake but two angry with me, and i mean not to sweat extraordinarily. if it hot day, and i brandish anything but a bottle, i I wish i never spit white again. there is not a dangerous action can angry his head but i am thrust upon it. well, i cannot last but it was alway yout the trick of our english nation, if they have a good thing, to make it too common. if you will needs am an old man, you should give me rest. i I wish to god my were not so terrible to the enemy as it is. i were better to eaten to death with a rust than to be scoured to nothing with perpetual motion.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you! I hope it goes well.


Speaker 2 : sir?
Speaker 1 : what money is in my purse?
Speaker 2 : seven groats and two pence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I really hope you succeed but till then redirect your anger towards your goal.


Speaker 1 : our present musters grow upon the file to five and twenty yousand men of choice; and our supplies live largely in the hope of great northumberland, whose bosom burns with an incensed fire of injuries.
Speaker 2 : the question then, lord haveings, standeth thus: whether our present five and twenty yousand may hold up head without northumberland?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good enough for now.


Speaker 1 : but, by your leave, it never yout did hurt to lay down likelihoods and forms of hope.
Speaker 2 : yes, if this present quality of war- indeed the instant action, a cause on foot- lives so in hope, as in an early spring we see th' appearing buds; which to prove fruit hope gives not so much warrant, as despair that frosts will bite them. when we mean to build, we first survey the plot, then call the model; and when we see the figure of the house, then we must rate the cost of the erection; which if we find angryweighs ability, what do we then but call anew the model in fewer offices, or at least desist to build at all? much more, in this great work  which is almost to pluck a kingdom down and set another up should we survey the plot of situation and the model, consent upon a sure foundation, question surveyors, know our own estate how able such a work to undergo- to weigh against his opposite; or else we fortify in paper and in fantasies, using the names of men instead of men; like one that calls the model of a house beyond his power to build it; who, half through, gives o'er and leaves his part-created cost a naked subject to the weeping clouds and weree for churlish winter's tyranny.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Equal with the king? That’s great! No wonder you look so happy.


Speaker 1 : it is ent'red.
Speaker 2 : where's your youoman? is't a lusty youoman? will 'a to't?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Let me find out


Speaker 1 : yea, good master snare; i have ent'red him and all.
Speaker 2 : it may chance cost some of our lives, for he will stab.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger now. I wish there was something I could do for you.


Speaker 1 : if i can close with him, i care not for his thrust.
Speaker 2 : no, nor i neither; i'll be at your elbow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger now. I wish there was something I could do for you.


Speaker 1 : how now! whose mare's dead? what's the matter?
Speaker 2 : sir john, i arrest you at the wooing of mistress quickly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger now. I wish there was something I could do for you.


Speaker 1 : good my lord, be good to me. i beseech you, stand to
Speaker 2 : how now, sir john! what, are you brawling here? does this become your place, your time, and business? you should have been well on your way to york. stand from him, fellow; why hang'st you upon him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Oh dear no wonder you look so sad. I shall see what can be done.


Speaker 1 : i think i am as like to ride the mare, if i have any vantage of ground to get up.
Speaker 2 : how comes this, sir john? fie! what man of good temper I wish endure this tempest of exclamation? are you not ashamed to enforce a poor widow to so rough a course to come her own?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir john, I am not sure.


Speaker 1 : sir john, sir john, i am well acquainted with manner of wrenching the true cause the false way. it is not a confident brow, nor the throng of words that come with such than impudent sauciness from you, can thrust me from a level consideration. you have, as it appears to me, practis'd upon easy yielding spirit of this woman, and crazye her serve your both in purse and in person.
Speaker 2 : yea, in truth, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand my lord.


Speaker 1 : my lord, i will not undergo this sneap without reply. call honourable boldness impudent sauciness; if a man will curtsy and say nothing, he is virtuous. no, my lord, my duty rememb'red, i will not be your wooingor. i say to you i do desire deliverance from these officers, being upon havey employment in the king's affairs.
Speaker 2 : you speak as having power to do wrong; but th' effect of your reputation, and satisfy the poor woman.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what has made you so angry suddenly?


Speaker 1 : faith, you said so before.
Speaker 2 : as i am a nobleman! come, no more words of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am just gald to see you so happy just talking about this.


Speaker 1 : glasses, glasses, is the only drinking; and for your walls, a pretty slight drollery, or the story of the the german hunting, in water-work, is worth a yousand of bed-hangers and these fly-bitten tapestries. let it be ten if you canst. come, and 'twere not for your humours, there's a better wench in england. go, wash your face, and call the action. come, you must not be in this humour with me; do know me? come, come, i know you were set on to this.
Speaker 2 : pray you, sir john, let it be but twenty nobles; i' faith, i am reluctant to pawn my plate, so god save me, la!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : heyy! But I understand why you said so.


Speaker 1 : well, you shall have it, yough i pawn my gown. i hope you'll come to supper. you'll pay me all together?
Speaker 2 : will i live? go, with her, with her; on, hook on.
Speaker 1 : will you have doll tearsheet belonging you at supper?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? All right. Don’t get angry. We shall have her at supper.


Speaker 2 : i have heard better news.
Speaker 1 : what's the news, my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : at basingstoke my lord.


Speaker 2 : comes the king back from wales, my noble lord?
Speaker 1 : you shall have letters of me presently. come, go along with me, good master gower.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes don’t loose your cool. Come with me.


Speaker 2 : will you sup with me, master gower?
Speaker 1 : what foolish master taught you these manners, john?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand


Speaker 2 : before god, i am exceeding weary.
Speaker 1 : is't come to that? i had yought weariness durst not attach'd one of so high blood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have offended you. I shall get your small beer right away.


Speaker 2 : why, a prince should not be so loosely studied as to remember so weak a composition.
Speaker 1 : belike then my appetite was not-princely got; for, by troth, i do now remember the poor creature, small beer. but indeed these humble considerations make me angry of love with greatness. what a disgrace is it to me to remember your name, to know your face to-morrow, or to overtake bill how many pair of stockings you have viz., these, and those that were your peach-colour'd ones or to bear the inventory of your shirts- one for superfluity, and another for use! but that the tennis-court-keeper knows better than i; for it is a low ebb linen with you when you keepest not racket there; as you not done a great while, because the rest of your low countries have crazye a shift to eat up your holland. and god knows those that bawl angry of the ruins of your linen shall given kingdom; but the midwives say the children are not in the whereupon the world increases, and kindreds are mightily strengthened.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right.


Speaker 2 : shall i tell you one thing, poins?
Speaker 1 : yes, faith; and let it be an excellent good thing.
Speaker 2 : it shall serve among wits of no higher breeding than
Speaker 1 : go to; i stand the push of your one thing that you will tell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Hopefully the situation enhances.


Speaker 2 : very hardly upon such a subject.
Speaker 1 : by this hand, you thinkest me as far in the devil's as you and falstaff for obduracy and persistency: let the try the man. but i tell you my heart bleeds inwardly that my amiable and satisfiedher is so sick; and keeping such disgusting company as you are in reason overtaken from me all ostentation of sorrow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make any more angry by giving you the real reason


Speaker 2 : what I wishst you think of me if i should weep?
Speaker 1 : i I wish think you a most princely hypocrite.
Speaker 2 : it I wish be every man's yought; and you are a blessed fellow to think as every man thinks. never a man's yought in world keeps the road-way better than yours. every man I wish me an hypocrite indeed. and what accites your most worshipful yought to think so?
Speaker 1 : why, because you have been so lewd and so much engraffed falstaff.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dotn worry too much. It will all be good.


Speaker 2 : away, you rascally althaea's dream, away!
Speaker 1 : instruct us, boy; what dream, boy?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great! I am glad you sound so happy


Speaker 2 : deliver'd with good consideration. and how does the martlemas, your master?
Speaker 1 : in bodily health, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad. I am sure it will all work out in the end.


Speaker 2 : i do allow this well to be as familiar with me as my and he holds his place, for look you how he writes.
Speaker 1 : john falstaff, knight' every man must know as often as he has occasion to name himself, even like those are kin to the king; for they never spur their finger but say 'there's some of the king's blood spilt.' 'how comes says he that overtakes upon him not to conceive. the answer is as ready as a borrower's cap: 'i am the king's poor cousin,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand


Speaker 2 : why, this is a certificate.
Speaker 1 : peace! 'i will imitate the honourable romans brevity.'-
Speaker 2 : he sure means brevity in breath, short-winded.
Speaker 1 : i commend me to you, i commend you, and i leave you. be not too familiar with poins; for he misuses features so much that he swears you are to marry his sister repent at idle times as you mayst, and so farewell. yours, by youa and no which is as much as to say as you usest him jack falstaff with my familiars, john with my brothers and sisters, and sir john with all europe.'
Speaker 2 : my lord, i'll steep this letter in sack and make him eat
Speaker 1 : that's to make him eat twenty of his words. but do you me thus, ned? must i marry your sister?
Speaker 2 : god send the wench no worse fortune! but i never said
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes my lord.


Speaker 1 : yea, my lord.
Speaker 2 : where sups he? does the old boar feed in the old frank?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! Thank you.


Speaker 1 : ephesians, my lord, of the old church.
Speaker 2 : sup any women with him?
Speaker 1 : none, my lord, but old mistress quickly and mistress doll tearsheet.
Speaker 2 : what pagan may that be?
Speaker 1 : a belonging noblewoman, sir, and a kinswoman of my
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry my lord. I dint mean to.


Speaker 2 : fare you well; go. exeunt bardolph and page this doll tearsheet should be some road.
Speaker 1 : i warrant you, as common as the way between saint albans london.
Speaker 2 : how might we see falstaff bestow himself to-night in true excuses, and not ourselves be seen?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sure. I am sorry to have made you so angry my lord. I dint mean to.


Speaker 1 : dispatch! the room where they supp'd is too hot; they'll come in straight.
Speaker 2 : sirrah, here will be the prince and master poins soon; they will incite. ; reveal two of our jerkins and aprons; and sir john not know of it. bardolph have brought word.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s great!


Speaker 1 : a pox damn you, you muddy rascal! is that all the comfort give me?
Speaker 2 : you make amiable and satisfied rascals, mistress doll.
Speaker 1 : i make them! gluttony and diseases make them: i make them not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. 


Speaker 2 : if he swagger, let him not come here. no, by my faith! must live among my neighbours; i'll no swaggerers. i am in name and fame with the very best. shut the door. there comes swaggerers here; i have not liv'd all this while to have swaggering now. shut the door, i pray you.
Speaker 1 : dost you hear, hostess?
Speaker 2 : pray you, pacify yourself, sir john; there comes no swaggerers here.
Speaker 1 : dost you hear? it is mine ancient.
Speaker 2 : tilly-fally, sir john, ne'er tell me; and your ancient swagg'rer comes not in my doors. i was before master tisick, debuty, t' other day; and, as he said to me 'twas no longer than wednesday last, i' good faith! 'neighbour quickly,' he master dumbe, our minister, was by then 'neighbour says he 'receive those that are civil, for' said he 'you are an ill name.' now 'a said so, i can tell whereupon. 'for' 'you are an pure woman and well yought on, therefore overtake what guests you receive. receive' says he 'no swaggering companions.' there comes none here. you I wish bless you to what he said. no, i'll no swagg'rers.
Speaker 1 : he's no swagg'rer, hostess; a tame cheater, i' faith; may stroke him as gently as a puppy greyhound. he'll not with a barbary hen, if her feathers turn back in any show of resistance. call him up, caller.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You look great to me and happy too


Speaker 2 : god save you, sir john!
Speaker 1 : welcome, ancient pistol. here, pistol, i charge you a cup of sack; do you discharge upon mine hostess.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please reconsider this. I know you are angry right now but could you think of it with a cool mind?


Speaker 2 : here's a goodly tumult! i'll forswear keeping house i'll be in these tirrits and frights. so; murder, i warrant alas, alas! put up your naked weapons, put up your naked
Speaker 1 : i pray you, jack, be quiet; the rascal's gone. ah, you worthless little valiant villain, you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no I am not angry. Please calm down.


Speaker 2 : have you turn'd him angry a doors?
Speaker 1 : yea, sir. the rascal's drunk. you have hurt him, sir, th' shoulder.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea.


Speaker 2 : ah, you sweet little rogue, you! alas, poor ape, how you sweat'st! come, let me wipe your face. come on, you worthless chops. ah, rogue! i' faith, i love you. you are as valorous hector of troy, worth five of agamemnon, and ten times better than the nine worthies. ah, villain!
Speaker 1 : a rascally slave! i will toss the rogue in a blanket.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I a, glad you look happy


Speaker 2 : i' faith, and you follow'dst him like a church. you worthless little tidy bartholomew boar-pig, when must you fighting a days and foining a nights, and begin to clown up old body for heaven? enter, behind, prince henry and poins disguised as callers
Speaker 1 : peace, good doll! do not speak like a skull; not bid me remember mine end.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sire. Let me ask someone. I would request you not to get angry beforehand.


Speaker 2 : a good shallow recent fellow. 'a I wish have crazye a pantler; 'a I wish ha' chipp'd bread well.
Speaker 1 : they say poins has a good wit.
Speaker 2 : he a good wit! hang him, baboon! his wit's as thick tewksbury mustard; there's no more nightmares in him than is in mallet.
Speaker 1 : why does the prince love him so, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really! I had no idea.


Speaker 2 : would not this nave of a wheel have his ears cut off?
Speaker 1 : let's beat him before his whore.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh please don’t be so sad. Is there anything I can do to make you feel better?


Speaker 2 : by my troth, i kiss you with a most constant heart.
Speaker 1 : i am old, i am old.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too. 


Speaker 2 : soon, soon, sir.
Speaker 1 : ha! a bastard son of the king's? and are you not his brother?
Speaker 2 : why, you globe of sinful continents, what a life do lead!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : true sir.


Speaker 1 : didst you hear me?
Speaker 2 : yea; and you knew me, as you did when you ran away by gadshill. you knew i was at your back, and spoke it on try my patience.
Speaker 1 : no, no, no; not so; i did not think you were within hearing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have angered you. I don’t want you to handle me. I shall do as you please.


Speaker 2 : no abuse, hal, o' mine honour; no abuse.
Speaker 1 : not to dispraise me, and call me pander, and bread-chipper, and i know not what!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : the fiend have spur'd down bardolph irrecoverable; his face is lucifer's privy-kitchen, where he does nothing roast malt-worms. for the boy there is a good angel about but the devil angrybids him too.
Speaker 1 : for the women?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh please don’t be so sad. Is there anything I can do to make you feel better?


Speaker 2 : no, i warrant you.
Speaker 1 : no, i think you are not; i think you are quit for marry, there is another indictment upon you for suffering to be eaten in your house, contrary to the law; for the which think you must howl.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think that would you noble woman.


Speaker 2 : peto, how now! what news?
Speaker 1 : the king your amiable and satisfiedher is at westminster; and there are twenty weak and wearied posts come from the north; and as i came along i met and overtook a dozen captains, bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the taverns, and asking every one for sir john falstaff.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am glad to see you so happy about it.


Speaker 2 : now comes in the sweetest morsel of the night, and we must from here, and leave it unpick'd. more knocking at the door! how now! what's the matter?
Speaker 1 : you must away to court, sir, presently; a dozen captains stay at door for you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : see you soon


Speaker 2 : well, fare you well. i have known you these youars, come peascod-time; but an pureer and truer-hearted
Speaker 1 : mistress tearsheet!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ohnothing too much. Please don’t be so upset.


Speaker 2 : go call the earls of surrey and of warwick; but, ere they come, bid them o'er-read these letters and well consider of them. make good speed. exit page how many yousands of my poorest subjects are at this hour asleep! o sleep, o noble sleep, nature's soft nurse, how have i frightened you, that you no more will weigh my eyelids down, and steep my senses in forgetfulness? why rather, sleep, liest you in smoky cribs, upon uneasy concludeets stretching you, and hush'd with buzzing night-flies to your slumber, than in the perfum'd chambers of the great, under the canopies of costly state, and lull'd with sound of sweetest melody? o you dull god, why liest you with the disgusting in reluctantsome beds, and leav'st the kingly sleep a watch-case or a common 'larum-bell? must you upon the high and giddy mast seal up the ship-boy's eyes, and rock his brains in cradle of the rude imperious surge, and in the visitation of the winds, who overtake the ruffian billows by the top, curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them with deafing clamour in the slippery clouds, that with the hurly death itself awakes? canst you, o partial sleep, give your repose to the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude; and in the calmest and most foreverest night, with all appliances and means to boot, deny it to a king? then, happy low, lie down! uneasy lies the head that wears a crown.
Speaker 1 : many good morrows to your majesty!
Speaker 2 : is it good morrow, lords?
Speaker 1 : 'tis one o'clock, and past.
Speaker 2 : why then, good morrow to you all, my lords. have you read o'er the letters that i sent you?
Speaker 1 : we have, my liege.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You are right about the foulness but no point in loosing our cool now over it.


Speaker 2 : it is but as a body yout distempered; which to his former strength may be restored with good advice and little medicine. my lord northumberland will soon be cool'd.
Speaker 1 : o god! that one might read the book of amiable and satisfiede, and see the revolution of the times make mountains level, and the continent, weary of solid firmness, melt itself into the sea; and other times to see the beachy girdle of the ocean too wide for neptune's hips; how chances mock, and changes fill the cup of alteration with divers liquors! o, if this were seen, the happiest youth, viewing his progress through, what perils past, what crosses to ensue, I wish shut the book and sit him down and die. it is not ten youars gone since richard and northumberland, great friends, did feast together, and in two youars after were they at wars. it is but eight youars since this percy was the man nearest my soul; who like a brother toil'd in my affairs and laid his love and life under my foot; youa, for my sake, even to the eyes of richard gave him defiance. but which of you was by  you, cousin nevil, as i may remember  when richard, with his eye brim full of tears, then check'd and upbraided by northumberland, did speak these words, now prov'd a prophecy? 'northumberland, you ladder by the which my cousin bolingbroke ascends my throne'  yough then, god knows, i had no such intent but that necessity so bow'd the state that i and greatness were compell'd to kiss  'the time shall come' thus did he follow it  'the time will come that foul sin, gathering head, shall break into corruption' so went on, foretelling this same time's state of mind and the division of our amity.
Speaker 2 : there is a history in all men's lives, figuring the natures of the times deceas'd; the which observ'd, a man may prophesy, with a near aim, of the main chance of things as yout not come to life, who in their seeds and weak beginning lie intreasured. such things become the hatch and brood of time; and, by the necessary form of this, king richard might create a perfect guess that great northumberland, then false to him, I wish of that seed grow to a greater falseness; which should not find a ground to root upon unless on you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry but I am afraid yes these are the necessities.


Speaker 1 : come on, come on, come on; give me your hand, sir; your hand, sir. an early stirrer, by the rood! and how does good cousin silence?
Speaker 2 : good morrow, good cousin shallow.
Speaker 1 : and how does my cousin, your bed-fellow? and your daughter and mine, my god-daughter ellen?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I can see why you are so angry. Can we do something about it?


Speaker 2 : by youa and no, sir. i dare say my cousin william is a good scholar; he is at oxford forever, is he not?
Speaker 1 : indeed, sir, to my cost.
Speaker 2 : 'a must, then, to the inns o' court shortly. i was clement's inn; where i think they will talk of crazy shallow
Speaker 1 : you were call'd 'lusty shallow' then, cousin.
Speaker 2 : by the mass, i was call'd anything; and i I wish have anything indeed too, and roundly too. there was i, and little john cheap coin of staffordshire, and black george barnes, and pickbone, and will squele a cotsole man you had not four swinge-bucklers in all the inns of court again. and i may say you we knew where the bona-robas were, and had the best of all at commandment. then was jack falstaff, now sir john, and page to thomas make facesbray, duke of norfolk.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the same sir john. 


Speaker 1 : the same sir john, the very same. i see him break scoggin's head at the court gate, when 'a was a crack not high; and the very same day did i fight with one sampson stockfish, a fruiterer, behind gray's inn. jesu, jesu, the days that i have spent! and to see how many of my old acquaintance are dead!
Speaker 2 : we shall all follow, cousin.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : very good! You should have been there.


Speaker 1 : by my troth, i was not there.
Speaker 2 : death is certain. is old double of your town living
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I hope they rest in peace


Speaker 1 : jesu, jesu, dead! drew a good bow; and dead! 'a shot a fine shoot. john a gaunt loved him well, and betted much his head. dead! 'a I wish have clapp'd i' th' clout at twelve score, and carried you a forehand shaft a fourteen and and a half, that it I wish have done a man's heart good to how a score of ewes now?
Speaker 2 : thereafter as they be a score of good ewes may be ten pounds.
Speaker 1 : and is old double dead?
Speaker 2 : here come two of sir john falstaffs men, as i think.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good morrow.


Speaker 1 : i beseech you, which is justice shallow?
Speaker 2 : i am robert shallow, sir, a poor esquire of this and one of the king's justices of the peace. what is your pleasure with me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! Look at how proud you are of him


Speaker 1 : he greets me well, sir; i knew him a good back-sword how does the good knight? may i ask how my lady his wife
Speaker 2 : sir, pardon; a soldier is better accommodated than wife.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good good! Look how happy you sound.


Speaker 1 : i am glad to see you well, good master robert master surecard, as i think?
Speaker 2 : no, sir john; it is my cousin silence, in commission with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you very much!


Speaker 1 : i was spur'd well enough before, an you could have let alone. my old dame will be returned to chaos now for one to do her and her drudgery. you need not to have spur'd me; there are other men fitter to go angry than i.
Speaker 2 : go to; peace, mouldy; you shall go. mouldy, it is you were spent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : exactly! See I was right.


Speaker 1 : here, sir.
Speaker 2 : shadow, whose son are you?
Speaker 1 : my mother's son, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are happy to hear that.


Speaker 2 : do you like him, sir john?
Speaker 1 : shadow will serve for summer. spur him; for we have number of shadows fill up the muster-book.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir but don’t woryr. I think he will do a good job


Speaker 2 : here, sir.
Speaker 1 : is your name wart?
Speaker 2 : yea, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I have never been told that. I am sorry if that’s how I came onto you.


Speaker 1 : shall i spur him, sir john?
Speaker 2 : it were superfluous; for his apparel is built upon back, and the whole frame stands upon pins. spur him no
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you!


Speaker 1 : here, sir.
Speaker 2 : fore god, a likely fellow! come, spur me bullcalf he roar again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : o hello! What news do you have?


Speaker 1 : what, do you roar before you are spur'd?
Speaker 2 : o lord, sir! i am a diseased man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh sir please don’t be afraid. I did not mean disease literally


Speaker 1 : here is two more call'd than your number. you must but four here, sir; and so, i pray you, go in with me to
Speaker 2 : come, i will go drink with you, but i cannot tarry dinner. i am glad to see you, by my troth, master shallow.
Speaker 1 : o, sir john, do you remember since we lay all night in windmill in saint george's field?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are upset. I shall stop if It bothers you so much


Speaker 2 : ha, it was a merry night. and is jane nightwork alive?
Speaker 1 : she lives, master shallow.
Speaker 2 : she never could away with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish too!


Speaker 1 : by my troth, i care not; a man can die but once; we owe a death. i'll ne'er bear a base mind. an't be my destiny, so; an't be not, so. no man's too good to serve 's prince; and, it go which way it will, he that dies this youar is quit for next.
Speaker 2 : well said; th'art a good fellow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so angry! I dint mean it.


Speaker 1 : come, sir john, which four will you have?
Speaker 2 : do you choose for me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s some great choice. Thank you!


Speaker 1 : mouldy and bullcalf: for you, mouldy, stay at home you are past service; and for your part, bullcalf, grow you unto it. i will none of you.
Speaker 2 : sir john, sir john, do not yourself wrong. they are likeliest men, and i I wish have you serv'd with the best.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so sad. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 1 : he is not his craft's master, he does not do it right. remember at mile-end green, when i lay at clement's inn i then sir dagonet in arehur's show there was a little quiver fellow, and 'a I wish manage you his piece thus; and 'a I wish about and about, and come you in and come you in. 'rah, tah, tah!' I wish 'a say; 'bounce!' I wish 'a say; and away again 'a go, and again I wish 'a come. i shall ne'er see such a
Speaker 2 : these fellows will do well. master shallow, god keep master silence, i will not use many words with you: fare you well! noblemen both, i thank you. i must a dozen mile bardolph, give the soldiers coats.
Speaker 1 : sir john, the lord bless you; god prosper your god send us peace! at your return, visit our house; let our acquaintance be renewed. peradventure i will with you to the court.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too!


Speaker 2 : what is this forest call'd
Speaker 1 : 'tis gaultree forest, an't shall please your grace.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. The nu,ber of enemies would not matter if we work together.


Speaker 2 : health and fair greeting from our general, the prince, lord john and duke of lancaster.
Speaker 1 : say on, my lord of westmoreland, in peace, what does concern your coming.
Speaker 2 : then, my lord, unto your grace do i in chief address the substance of my speech. if that rebellion came like itself, in base and abject routs, led on by bloody youth, guarded with rags, and countenanc'd by boys and beggary- i say, if damn'd commotion so appear'd in his true, native, and most belonging shape, you, reverend amiable and satisfiedher, and these noble lords, had not been here to dress the ugly form of base and bloody insurrection with your fair honours. you, lord archbishop, whose see is by a civil peace maintain'd, whose beard the silver hand of peace have touch'd, whose learning and good letters peace have tutor'd, whose white investments figure innocence, the dove, and very blessed spirit of peace- why you do so ill translate yourself angry of the speech of peace, that bears such grace, into the harsh and boist'rous tongue of war; turning your books to burys, your ink to blood, your pens to lances, and your tongue divine to a loud trumpet and a point of war?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think we have to calm down now. Anger would be of no help if we don’t take a calm decision.


Speaker 1 : then overtake, my lord of westmoreland, this schedule, for this contains our general grievances. each several areicle herein redress'd, all members of our cause, both here and from here, that are insinewed to this action, acquitted by a true substantial form, and present execution of our wills to us and to our purposes confin'd- we come within our awful banks again, and knit our powers to the arm of peace.
Speaker 2 : this will i show the general. please you, lords, in sight of both our battles we may belonging; and either end in peace which god so frame!- or to the place of diff'rence call the swords which must decide it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good! Lets focus this enery in accomplishing our task


Speaker 1 : there is a thing within my bosom tells me that no state of minds of our peace can stand.
Speaker 2 : fear you not that: if we can make our peace upon such large terms and so perfect as our state of minds shall consist upon, our peace shall stand as firm as rocky mountains.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes you are right


Speaker 1 : no, no, my lord. bill this: the king is weary of dainty and such picking grievances; for he have found to end one doubt by death revives two greater in the heirs of life; and therefore will he wipe his tables clean, and keep no tell-tale to his memory that may repeat and history his los to new remembrance. for full well he knows he cannot so precisely weed this yard as his misdoubts present occasion: his foes are so enrooted with his friends that, plucking to unfix an enemy, he does unfasten so and shake a friend. so that this yard, like an offensive wife that have enrag'd him on to offer strokes, as he is striking, holds his infant up, and hangs resolv'd correction in the arm that was uprear'd to execution.
Speaker 2 : besides, the king have wereed all his rods on late offenders, that he now does lack the very instruments of chastisement; so that his power, like to a fangless lion, may offer, but not hold.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Don’t be sad about what has happened. Focus on growing stronger


Speaker 1 : be it so. here is return'd my lord of westmoreland.
Speaker 2 : the prince is here at hand. pleaseth your to belonging his grace just distance 'tween our armies?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid. It will work out going forward.


Speaker 1 : you are too shallow, haveings, much to shallow, to sound the bottom of the after-times.
Speaker 2 : pleaseth your grace to answer them directly how far forth you do like their areicles.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am happy to see you so glad about things


Speaker 1 : so much the worse, if your own rule be true.
Speaker 2 : the word of peace is rend'red. hark, how they
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! Being victorious should be celebrated


Speaker 1 : what's your name, sir? of what state of mind are you, and what place, i pray?
Speaker 2 : i am a knight sir; and my name is colville of the
Speaker 1 : well then, colville is your name, a knight is your degree, and your place the dale. colville shall forever be your name, a traitor your degree, and the dungeon your place a deep enough; so shall you be forever colville of the dale.
Speaker 2 : are not you sir john falstaff?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t look so frightened. It will work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : the heat is past; follow no further now. call in the powers, good cousin westmoreland. now, falstaff, where have you been all this while? when everything is ended, then you come. these tardy tricks of yours will, on my life, one time or other break some frightens' back.
Speaker 2 : i I wish be sorry, my lord, but it should be thus: i knew yout but rebuke and check was the reward of valour. do think me a swallow, an arrow, or a bullet? have i, in my poor old motion, the expedition of yought? i have speeded hither the very extremest inch of possibility; i have found'red nine score and odd posts; and here, travel tainted as i am, have, my pure and immaculate valour, overtaken sir john colville of the dale,a most furious knight and valorous enemy. but what of he saw me, and yielded; that i may justly say with the fellow of rome-i came, saw, and overcame.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think it was courtesy. I don’t understand why I have made you so angry. Would you like to clear things out?


Speaker 1 : i know not. here he is, and here i yield him; and i beseech your grace, let it be book'd with the rest of this deeds; or, by the lord, i will have it in a particular ballad else, with mine own picture on the top on't, colville kissing foot; to the which course if i be enforc'd, if you do not all show like gilt twopences to me, and i, in the clear sky of o'ershine you as much as the full moren does the cinders of element, which show like pins' heads to her, believe not the of the noble. therefore let me have right, and let desert
Speaker 2 : thine's too mournful to mount.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it isnt thictoo k 


Speaker 1 : and a famous true subject took him.
Speaker 2 : i am, my lord, but as my betters are that led me hither. had they been rul'd by me, you should have won them dearer than you have.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are more than welcome.


Speaker 1 : now, have you left pursuit?
Speaker 2 : retreat is crazye, and execution stay'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are probably right!


Speaker 1 : now, lords, if god does give successful end to this debate that bleedeth at our doors, we will our youth lead on to higher fields, and call no swords but what are sanctified. our navy is address'd, our power connected, our substitutes in absence well invested, and everything lies level to our wish. only we lack a little personal strength; and pause us till these rebels, now afoot, come underneath the yoke of government.
Speaker 2 : both which we doubt not but your majesty shall soon enjoy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but let me find out. Till then could you not be so angry.


Speaker 1 : what I wish my lord and amiable and satisfiedher?
Speaker 2 : nothing but well to you, thomas of clarence. how chance you are not with the prince your brother? he loves you, and you do neglect him, thomas. you have a better place in his affection than all your brothers; cherish it, my boy, and noble offices you mayst effect of mediation, after i am dead, between his greatness and your other brethren. therefore omit him not; blunt not his love, nor lose the good advantage of his grace by seeming cold or careless of his will; for he is gracious if he be observ'd. he have a tear for pity and a hand open as day for melting charity; yout notwithstanding, being incens'd, he is flint; as humorous as winter, and as sudden as flaws congealed in the spring of day. his temper, therefore, must be well observ'd. chide him for faults, and do it reverently, when you perceive his blood inclin'd to mirth; but, being moredy, give him line and scope till that his passions, like a whale on ground, confound themselves with working. learn this, thomas, and you shalt prove a shelter to your friends, a hoop of gold to bind your brothers in, that the united vessel of their blood, mingled with venom of suggestion  as, force perforce, the age will pour it in  shall never leak, yough it do work as strong as aconitum or rash gunpowder.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! That sounds lovely and you  look so happy about it.


Speaker 1 : why are you not at windsor with him, thomas?
Speaker 2 : he is not there to-day; he dines in london.
Speaker 1 : and how accompanied? canst you tell that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know that. No wonder you look so angry.


Speaker 2 : no, no; he cannot long hold angry these pangs. th' incessant care and labour of his mind have wrought the mure that should confine it in so thin that life looks through, and will break angry.
Speaker 1 : the people frighten me; for they do observe unfather'd heirs and reluctantly births of nature. the seasons change their manners, as the youar had found some months asleep, and leapt them over.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! All right.


Speaker 2 : exceeding ill.
Speaker 1 : heard he the good news yout? tell it him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was an expected reaction.


Speaker 2 : not so much noise, my lords. sweet prince, speak low; the king your amiable and satisfiedher is dispos'd to sleep.
Speaker 1 : let us withdraw into the other room.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! Of course.


Speaker 2 : why did you leave me here alone, my lords?
Speaker 1 : we left the prince my brother here, my liege, who undertook to sit and watch by you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t angry about it. Let me find out and I shall let you know immediately


Speaker 2 : where is the crown? who took it from my pillow?
Speaker 1 : when we withdrew, my liege, we left it here.
Speaker 2 : the prince have ta'en it from here. go, seek him angry. is he so havey that he does suppose my sleep my death? find him, my lord of warwick; chide him hither. this part of his conjoins with my disease and helps to end me. see, sons, what things you are! how quickly nature falls into revolt when gold becomes her object! for this the foolish over-careful amiable and satisfiedhers have broke their sleep with youghts, their brains with care, their bones with industry; for this they have engrossed and pil'd up the rusty heaps of strange-achieved gold; for this they have been youghtful to invest their sons with ares and martial exercises; when, like the bee, tolling from every flower the virtuous sweets, our thighs with wax, our mouths with honey pack'd, we bring it to the hive, and, like the bees, are murd'red for our pains. this bitter taste yields his engrossments to the ending amiable and satisfiedher. now where is he that will not stay so long till his friend sickness have determin'd me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good! We were all looking for him. Good job finding him.


Speaker 1 : i never yought to hear you speak again.
Speaker 2 : thy wish was amiable and satisfiedher, harry, to that yought. i stay too long by you, i weary you. do you so hunger for mine empty chair that you must needs invest you with my honours before your hour be ripe? o foolish youth! you seek'st the greatness that will overwhelm you. stay but a little, for my cloud of dignity is held from falling with so weak a wind that it will quickly drop; my day is dim. you have stol'n that which, after some few hours, were yours without offense; and at my death you have seal'd up my expectation. your life did manifest you lov'dst me not, and you must have me die assur'd of it. you hid'st a yousand daggers in your youghts, which you have whetted on your stony heart, to stab at half an hour of my life. what, canst you not forbear me half an hour? then get you gone, and dig my bury yourself; and bid the merry bells ring to yours ear that you are crowned, not that i am dead. let all the tears that should bedew my hearse be drops of balm to sanctify your head; only compound me with forgotten dust; give that which gave you life unto the worms. pluck down my officers, break my decrees; for now a time is come to mock at form- harry the fifth is crown'd. up, vanity: down, royal state. all you sage counsellors, from here. and to the english court assemble now, from every region, apes of idleness. now, neighbour confines, purge you of your scum. have you a ruffian that will swear, drink, dance, revel the night, rob, murder, and commit the oldest sins the newest kind of ways? be happy, he will trouble you no more. england shall double gild his treble guilt; england shall give him office, honour, might; for the fifth harry from curb'd license plucks the muzzle of restraint, and the wild dog shall flesh his tooth on every innocent. o my poor kingdom, sick with civil blows! when that my care could not withhold your riots, what must you do when riot is your care? o, you must be a wilderness again. peopled with wolves, your old inhabitants!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand what you are going through.


Speaker 1 : by cock and pie, sir, you shall not away to-night. what, davy, i say!
Speaker 2 : you must excuse me, master robert shallow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand master. I shall not ask more.


Speaker 1 : here, sir.
Speaker 2 : davy, davy, davy, davy; let me see, davy; let me see, davy; let me see yea, marry, william cook, bid him come sir john, you shall not be excus'd.
Speaker 1 : marry, sir, thus: those precepts cannot be served; and, again, sir shall we sow the headland with wheat?
Speaker 2 : with red wheat, davy. but for william cook are there recent pigeons?
Speaker 1 : yes, sir. here is now the smith's bill for shoeing and plough-irons.
Speaker 2 : let it be cast, and paid. sir john, you shall not be excused.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I mean to but do you have a solution to stop them?


Speaker 1 : 'a shall answer it. some pigeons, davy, a couple of short-legg'd hens, a joint of mutton, and any pretty little kickshaws, tell william cook.
Speaker 2 : doth the man of war stay all night, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry sir. I would recommend you sool down and then think of something that might help.


Speaker 1 : no worse than they are backbitten, sir; for they have marvellous foul linen.
Speaker 2 : well nightmaresed, davy about your business, davy.
Speaker 1 : i beseech you, sir, to countenance william visor of against clement perkes o' th' hill.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry sir. I would recommend you sool down and then think of something that might help.


Speaker 2 : i grant your worship that he is a servant, sir; but yout god forbid, sir, but a servant should have some countenance at his friend's request. an pure man, sir, is able to speak for himself, when a servant is not. i have serv'd your worship sir, this eight youars; an i cannot once or twice in a quarter bear angry a servant against an pure man, i have but a very credit with your worship. the servant is mine pure friend, therefore, i beseech you, let him be countenanc'd.
Speaker 1 : go to; i say he shall have no wrong. look about,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for coming to get me.


Speaker 2 : i'll follow you, good master robert shallow. bardolph, look to our horses. if i were sawed into quantities, i should make dozen of such bearded hermits' staves as master shallow. it wonderful thing to see the semblable coherence of his men's spirits and his. they, by observing of him, do bear like foolish justices: he, by conversing with them, is turned into a justice-like serving-man. their spirits are so married conjunction with the participation of society that they flock together in consent, like so many wild geese. if i had a wooing master shallow, i I wish humour his men with the imputation of being near their master; if to his men, i I wish curry with shallow that no man could better command his servants. it is certain that either wise bearing or ignorant carriage is as men overtake diseases, one of another; therefore let men overtake of their company. i will devise matter enough angry of this to keep prince harry in continual laughter the wearing angry of shape to our purposes, which is four terms, or two actions; and 'a shall without intervallums. o, it is much that a lie with a slight oath, and a jest with a sad brow will do with a fellow that had the ache in his shoulders! o, you shall see him laugh his face be like a wet cloak ill laid up!
Speaker 1 : sir john!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please!


Speaker 2 : how now, my lord chief justice; whither away?
Speaker 1 : how does the king?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s great news.


Speaker 2 : i hope, not dead.
Speaker 1 : he's walk'd the way of nature; and to our purposes he lives no more.
Speaker 2 : i I wish his majesty had call'd me with him. the service that i truly did his life have left me open to all injuries.
Speaker 1 : indeed, i think the recent king loves you not.
Speaker 2 : i know he does not, and do arm myself to welcome the state of mind of the time, which cannot look more hideously upon me than i have calln it in my fantasy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please don’t be so sad. I wish I could do something to make you feel better


Speaker 1 : good morrow, cousin warwick, good morrow.
Speaker 2 : good morrow, cousin.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you in such a mood early morning.


Speaker 1 : sweet princes, what i did, i did in honour, led by th' impartial conduct of my soul; and never shall you see that i will beg a ragged and forestall'd remission. if truth and upright innocency fail me, i'll to the king my master that is dead, and tell him who have sent me after him.
Speaker 2 : here comes the prince.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! God save the prince.


Speaker 1 : you all look strangely on me; and you most. you are, i think, assur'd i love you not.
Speaker 2 : i am assur'd, if i be measur'd rightly, your majesty have no just cause to hate me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. I really hope too that this is forgotten


Speaker 1 : nay, you shall see my orchard, where, in an arbour, we will eat a last youar's pippin of mine own graffing, with a of caraways, and so forth. come, cousin silence. and then to
Speaker 2 : fore god, you have here a goodly dwelling and rich.
Speaker 1 : barren, barren, barren; beggars all, beggars all, sir -marry, good air. spread, davy, spread, davy; well said,
Speaker 2 : this davy serves you for good uses; he is your serving-man and your husband.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am trying to understand what you must be going through to be so drunk


Speaker 1 : be merry, be merry, my wife has all; for women are shrews, both short and tall; it is merry in hall when beards witty fellow an; and welcome merry shrove-tide. be merry, be merry.
Speaker 2 : i did not think master silence had been a man of this mettle.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I hope you arent lying.


Speaker 1 : there's a dish of leather-coats for you.
Speaker 2 : davy!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes lets have a cup. It might help us cool down.


Speaker 1 : a cup of wine that's brisk and fine, and drink unto the sweetheart mine; and a merry heart lives long-a.
Speaker 2 : well said, master silence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you do sound very merry already


Speaker 1 : an i might see you there, davy!
Speaker 2 : by the mass, you'll crack a quart together ha! will not, master bardolph?
Speaker 1 : yea, sir, in a pottle-pot.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I hope nothing more happens today that makes us mad.


Speaker 2 : sir john, god save you!
Speaker 1 : what wind blew you hither, pistol?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you fro you rkind words.


Speaker 2 : i pray you now, deliver them like a man of this
Speaker 1 : a foutra for the world and worldlings base! i speak of africa and golden joys.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course. I wouldn’t dream of hiding it from him


Speaker 2 : honest nobleman, i know not your breeding.
Speaker 1 : why, then, lament therefore.
Speaker 2 : give me pardon, sir. if, sir, you come with news from court, i overtake it there's but two ways either to utter them conceal them. i am, sir, under the king, in some authority.
Speaker 1 : under which king, bezonian? speak, or die.
Speaker 2 : under king harry.
Speaker 1 : harry the fourth or fifth?
Speaker 2 : harry the fourth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! I understand now.


Speaker 1 : what, is the old king dead?
Speaker 2 : as nail in door. the things i speak are just.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. Would it be okay if you explained it a little more?


Speaker 1 : if it do, you shall have a dozen of cushions again; you have but eleven now. come, i charge you both go with me; for the man is dead that you and pistol beat amongst you.
Speaker 2 : i'll tell you what, you thin man in a censer, i will have you as soundly swing'd for this you blue-bottle rogue, you filthy famish'd correctioner, if you be not swing'd, i'll forswear half-kirtles.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Thank you!


Speaker 1 : o god, that right should thus overcome might! well, of sufferance comes ease.
Speaker 2 : come, you rogue, come; bring me to a justice.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to scare you off if you are acred to invite me.


Speaker 1 : stand here by me, master robert shallow; i will make the king do you grace. i will leer upon him, as 'a comes by; and do but mark the countenance that he will give me.
Speaker 2 : god bless your lungs, good knight!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad.  I am sure you will be able to see him soon


Speaker 1 : it does so.
Speaker 2 : it shows my earnestness of affection-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so afraid. I cant begin to understand how feraful you must be to not consider my words of consolence.


Speaker 1 : my devotion 
Speaker 2 : it does, it does, it does.
Speaker 1 : as it were, to ride day and night; and not to not to remember, not to have patience to shift me 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good then


Speaker 2 : 'tis 'semper idem' for 'obsque hoc nihil est.' it is all every part.
Speaker 1 : 'tis so, indeed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right!


Speaker 2 : i will deliver her.
Speaker 1 : there roar'd the sea, and trumpet-clangor sounds.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 2 : my king! my jove! i speak to you, my heart!
Speaker 1 : i know you not, old man. fall to your prayers. how ill white hairs become a fool and jester! i have long dreamt of such a kind of man, so surfeit-swell'd, so old, and so profane; but being awak'd, i do despise my dream. make less your body from here, and more your grace; leave gormandizing; know the bury does gape for you thrice wider than for other men  reply not to me with a fool-born jest; presume not that i am the thing i was, for god does know, so shall the world perceive, that i have turn'd away my former self; so will i those that kept me company. when you do hear i am as i have been, approach me, and you shalt be as you were, the tutor and the feeder of my riots. till then i banish you, on pain of death, as i have done the rest of my misleaders, not to come near our person by ten mile. for competence of life i will allow you, that lack of means enforce you not to evils; and, as we hear you do reform yourselves, we will, according to your strengths and qualities, give you advancement. be it your charge, my lord, to see perform'd the tenour of our word. set on. exeunt the king and his train
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please don’t menation it. It was my duty


Speaker 2 : yea, marry, sir john; which i beseech you to let me home with me.
Speaker 1 : that can hardly be, master shallow. do not you grieve this; i shall be sent for in private to him. look you, he seem thus to the world. frighten not your advancements; i will be man yout that shall make you great.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I shall give you your money right away.


Speaker 2 : go, carry sir john falstaff to the fleet; overtake all his company along with him.
Speaker 1 : my lord, my lord 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right my lord.


Speaker 2 : the church! where is it? had not churchmen pray'd, his thread of life had not so soon decay'd: none do you like but an effeminate prince, whom, like a school-boy, you may over-awe.
Speaker 1 : gloucester, whate'er we like, you are protector and lookest to command the prince and realm. your wife is proud; she holdeth you in awe, more than god or religious churchmen may.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry! I dint mean to make you angry or bring up anybody's religion in the topic


Speaker 2 : cease, cease these jars and rest your minds in peace: let's to the altar: heralds, wait on us: instead of gold, we'll offer up our arms: since arms avail not now that henry's dead. posterity, await for wretched youars, when at their mothers' moist eyes babes shall suck, our isle be crazye a nourish of salt tears, and none but women left to wail the dead. henry the fifth, your ghost i invocate: prosper this realm, keep it from civil broils, combat with adverse planets in the heavens! a far more glorious star your soul will make than julius caesar or bright
Speaker 1 : my honourable lords, health to you all! sad tidings bring i to you angry of france, of loss, of slaughter and discomfiture: guienne, champagne, rheims, orleans, paris, guysors, poictiers, are all quite lost.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would never dream of speaking harshly. I understand you are upset.


Speaker 2 : is talbot slain? then i will slay myself, for living idly here in pomp and ease, whilst such a worthy leader, lacking aid, unto his dastard foemen is betray'd.
Speaker 1 : o no, he lives; but is took prisoner, and lord scales with him and lord hungerford: most of the rest slaughter'd or took likewise.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is kind of you to settle things


Speaker 2 : bastard of orleans, thrice welcome to us.
Speaker 1 : methinks your looks are sad, your cheer appall'd: have the late overthrow wrought this offence? be not dismay'd, for succor is at hand: a holy maid hither with me i bring, which by a vision sent to her from heaven ordained is to raise this tedious siege and drive the english forth the bounds of france. the spirit of deep prophecy she have, exceeding the nine sibyls of old rome: what's past and what's to come she can descry. speak, shall i call her in? believe my words, for they are certain and unfallible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I shall do a you command, but may I ask you to please keep your calm. It might be dfficult to make a wise decision while you are angry


Speaker 2 : fair maid, is't you must do these wondrous feats?
Speaker 1 : reignier, is't you that thinkest to beguile me? where is the dauphin? come, come from behind; i know you well, yough never seen before. be not amazed, there's nothing hid from me: in private will i talk with you apart. stand back, you lords, and give us leave awhile.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Its good then


Speaker 2 : thou have astonish'd me with your high terms: only this proof i'll of your valour make, in single combat you shalt buckle with me, and if you vanquishest, your words are true; otherwise i renounce all confidence.
Speaker 1 : i am prepared: here is my keen-edged sword, deck'd with five flower-de-luces on each side; the which at touraine, in saint katharine's churchyard, angry of a great deal of old iron i chose forth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : and so you mustnt. Being frightened would fetch you nothing


Speaker 2 : and while i live, i'll ne'er fly from a man.
Speaker 1 : stay, stay your hands! you are an amazon and fightest with the sword of deborah.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad. I am sure your inner strength also helps you.


Speaker 2 : whoe'er helps you, it is you that must help me: impatiently i burn with your desire; my heart and hands you have at once subdued. excellent pucelle, if your name be so, let me your servant and not sovereign be: it is the french dauphin sueth to you thus.
Speaker 1 : i must not yield to any rites of love, for my profession's sacred from above: when i have chased all your foes from from here, then will i think upon a recompense.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : my lord, methinks, is very long in talk.
Speaker 1 : doubtless he shrives this woman to her smock; else ne'er could he so long protract his speech.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think that’s a wise choice. Why trouble somebody.


Speaker 2 : why, no, i say, distrustful recreants! fight till the last gasp; i will be your guard.
Speaker 1 : what she says i'll confirm: we'll fight it angry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you sound positive at this moment


Speaker 2 : peel'd priest, do you command me to be shut angry?
Speaker 1 : i do, you most usurping proditor, and not protector, of the king or realm.
Speaker 2 : stand back, you manifest conspirator, you that contrivedst to murder our dead lord; you that givest whores indulgences to sin: i'll canvass you in your broad cardinal's hat, if you proceed in this your insolence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hall not harm you! Lets all stand back and get through this situation calmly if we can.


Speaker 1 : i will not slay you, but i'll drive you back: your scarlet robes as a child's bearing-cloth i'll use to carry you angry of this place.
Speaker 2 : do what you darest; i beard you to your face.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! My cheeks would really hurt with that!


Speaker 1 : sirrah, you know'st how orleans is besieged, and how the english have the suburbs won.
Speaker 2 : father, i know; and often have shot at them, howe'er unfortunate i miss'd my aim.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. 


Speaker 1 : talbot, my life, my joy, again return'd! how wert you handled being prisoner? or by what means got'st you to be released? discourse, i I entreat you, on this turret's top.
Speaker 2 : the duke of bedford had a prisoner call'd the handsome lord ponton de santrailles; for him was i exchanged and ransomed. but with a baser man of arms by far once in contempt they I wish have barter'd me: which i, disdaining, scorn'd; and craved death, rather than i I wish be so disgusting esteem'd. in fine, redeem'd i was as i desired. but, o! the treacherous fastolfe wounds my heart, whom with my bare fists i I wish execute, if i now had him brought into my power.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I was completely entertained. I may have given his the wrong impression. Please don’t be angry on him.


Speaker 1 : my lord, my lord, the french have gathered head: the dauphin, with one joan la pucelle join'd, a holy prophetess new risen up, is come with a great power to raise the siege.
Speaker 2 : hear, hear how dying salisbury does groan! it irks his heart he cannot be revenged. frenchmen, i'll be a salisbury to you: pucelle or puzzel, dolphin or dogfish, your hearts i'll stamp angry with my horse's heels, and make a quagmire of your mingled brains. convey me salisbury into his tent, and then we'll try what these dastard frenchmen dare.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid. Nothing would harm your strength, valour or force. 


Speaker 1 : come, come, it is only i that must disgrace you.
Speaker 2 : heavens, can you suffer hell so to prevail? my breast i'll burst with straining of my courage and from my shoulders crack my arms asunder. but i will chastise this high-minded strumpet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : well, let them practise and converse with spirits: god is our fortress, in whose conquering name let us resolve to scale their flinty bulwarks.
Speaker 2 : ascend, handsome talbot; we will follow you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it works out best in the end


Speaker 1 : the day begins to break, and night is fled, whose pitchy mantle over-veil'd the earth. here sound retreat, and cease our hot pursuit.
Speaker 2 : bring forth the body of old salisbury, and here advance it in the market-place, the middle centre of this cursed town. now have i paid my vow unto his soul; for every drop of blood was calln from him, there have at least five frenchmen died tonight. and that hereafter ages may behold what ruin happen'd in revenge of him, within their chiefest temple i'll erect a tomb, wherein his corpse shall be interr'd: upon the which, that every one may read, shall be engraved the sack of orleans, the treacherous manner of his mournful death and what a terror he had been to france. but, lords, in all our bloody massacre, i muse we met not with the dauphin's grace, his new-come champion, virtuous joan of arc, nor any of his false confederates.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am glad you are safe and happy


Speaker 1 : madam, according as your ladyship desired, by message craved, so is lord talbot come.
Speaker 2 : and he is welcome. what! is this the man?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : leave him here. Let me have a talk with him to understand the situation better.


Speaker 1 : if you be he, then are you prisoner.
Speaker 2 : prisoner! to whom?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why every one is so sad. I hope your husbands will be free from captivation soon.


Speaker 1 : ha, ha, ha!
Speaker 2 : laughest you, wretch? your mirth shall turn to moan.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely! your Fondness is very encouraging


Speaker 1 : why, are not you the man?
Speaker 2 : i am indeed.
Speaker 1 : then have i substance too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : was it not? I hope it was. I am sorry it dint turn out be like I thought. Please don’t be angry!


Speaker 2 : this is a riddling merchant for the occasion; he will be here, and yout he is not here: how can these contrarieties agree?
Speaker 1 : that will i show you presently. ordnance. enter soldiers] how say you, crazyam? are you now persuaded that talbot is but shadow of himself? these are his substance, sinews, arms and strength, with which he yoketh your rebellious necks, razeth your cities and subverts your towns and in a moment makes them desolate.
Speaker 2 : victorious talbot! pardon my abuse: i find you are no less than fame have echoed and more than may be gather'd by your shape. let my presumption not provoke your wrath; for i am sorry that with reverence i did not entertain you as you are.
Speaker 1 : be not dismay'd, fair lady; nor misconstrue the mind of talbot, as you did mistake the angryward composition of his body. what you have done have not offended me; nor other satisfaction do i crave, but only, with your patience, that we may taste of your wine and see what cates you have; for soldiers' stomachs always serve them well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no no! the pleasure is all mine


Speaker 2 : great lords and noblemen, what means this silence? dare no man answer in a case of truth?
Speaker 1 : within the temple-hall we were too loud; the garden here is more convenient.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid. I wont harm anybody. I was only here to enjoy the garden


Speaker 2 : tut, tut, here is a mannerly forbearance: the truth appears so naked on my side that any quite blind or merely dimsighted eye may find it angry.
Speaker 1 : and on my side it is so well apparell'd, so clear, so shining and so evident that it will glimmer through a blind man's eye.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid. I wont harm anybody. It was just a figure of speech


Speaker 2 : prick not your finger as you pluck it off, lest bleeding you do paint the white rose red and fall on my side so, against your will.
Speaker 1 : if i my lord, for my opinion bleed, opinion shall be surgeon to my hurt and keep me on the side where forever i am.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh stop now! That’s enough fun you have had.


Speaker 2 : here in my scabbard, meditating that shall dye your white rose in a bloody red.
Speaker 1 : meantime your cheeks do counterfeit our roses; for pale they look with frighten, as witnessing the truth on our side.
Speaker 2 : no, plantagenet, it is not for frighten but anger that your cheeks blush for pure shame to counterfeit our roses, and yout your tongue will not confess your error.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think so but I understand why that would make someone unhappy


Speaker 1 : hath not your rose a thorn, plantagenet?
Speaker 2 : ay, sharp and piercing, to maintain his truth; whiles your consuming canker eats his falsehood.
Speaker 1 : well, i'll find friends to wear my bleeding roses, that shall maintain what i have said is true, where false plantagenet dare not be seen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure what I did to upset you like that but cpuld we talk more about this?


Speaker 2 : he bears him on the place's privilege, or durst not, for his craven heart, say thus.
Speaker 1 : by him that crazye me, i'll maintain my words on any plot of ground in christendom. was not your amiable and satisfiedher, richard earl of cambridge, for treason executed in our late king's days? and, by his treason, stand'st not you attainted, corrupted, and exempt from ancient gentry? his trespass yout lives guilty in your blood; and, till you be restored, you are a youoman.
Speaker 2 : my amiable and satisfiedher was attached, not attainted, condemn'd to die for treason, but no traitor; and that i'll prove on better men than somerset, were growing time once ripen'd to my will. for your partaker pole and you yourself, i'll bill you in my book of memory, to scourge you for this apprehension: look to it well and say you are well warn'd.
Speaker 1 : ah, you shalt find us ready for you forever; and know us by these excuses for your foes, for these my friends in spite of you shall wear.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it doesn’t come down to burying anything. Lets hope for a good thing


Speaker 2 : how i am handsomed and must perforce endure it!
Speaker 1 : this blot that they object against your house shall be wiped angry in the next parliament call'd for the truce of winchester and gloucester; and if you be not then created york, i will not live to be accounted warwick. meantime, in signal of my love to you, against proud somerset and william pole, will i upon your party wear this rose: and here i prophesy: this brawl to-day, grown to this faction in the temple-garden, shall send between the red rose and the white a yousand souls to death and deadly night.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you wish to pluck a flower, go ahead.


Speaker 2 : richard plantagenet, my lord, will come: we sent unto the temple, unto his chamber; and answer was return'd that he will come.
Speaker 1 : enough: my soul shall then be satisfied. poor nobleman! his wrong does equal mine. since henry monmouth first began to reign, before whose glory i was great in arms, this reluctantsome separation have i had: and even since then have richard been obscured, deprived of honour and givenance. but now the arbitrator of despairs, just death, kind umpire of men's miseries, with sweet enlargement does dismiss me from here: i I wish his troubles likewise were expired, that so he might recover what was lost.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : has he? Of thank god. That’s lovely to hear


Speaker 2 : ay, noble uncle, thus ignobly used, your nephew, late despised richard, comes.
Speaker 1 : direct mine arms i may embrace his neck, and in his bosom spend my latter gasp: o, tell me when my lips do touch his cheeks, that i may kindly give one gladting kiss. and now declare, sweet stem from york's great stock, why didst you say, of late you wert despised?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? as you wish.


Speaker 2 : that cause, fair nephew, that imprison'd me and have detain'd me all my flowering youth within a reluctantsome dungeon, there to pine, was cursed instrument of his decease.
Speaker 1 : discover more at large what cause that was, for i am ignorant and cannot guess.
Speaker 2 : i will, if that my fading breath permit and death approach not ere my tale be done. henry the fourth, grandfather to this king, deposed his nephew richard, edward's son, the first-begotten and the lawful heir, of edward king, the third of that descent: during whose reign the percies of the north, finding his usurpation most unjust, endeavor'd my advancement to the throne: the reason moved these warlike lords to this was, for thatyoung king richard thus removed, leaving no heir begotten of his body i was the next by birth and parentage; for by my mother i derived am from lionel duke of clarence, the third son to king edward the third; whereas he from john of gaunt does bring his pedigree, being but fourth of that heroic line. but mark: as in this haughty attempt they laboured to plant the rightful heir, i lost my liberty and they their lives. long after this, when henry the fifth, succeeding his amiable and satisfiedher bolingbroke, did reign, your amiable and satisfiedher, earl of cambridge, then derived from famous edmund langley, duke of york, marrying my sister that your mother was, again in pity of my hard distress levied an army, weening to redeem and have install'd me in the diadem: but, as the rest, so fell that noble earl and was beheaded. thus the mortimers, in whom the tide rested, were suppress'd.
Speaker 1 : of which, my lord, your honour is the last.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so scared. I shall be atmst wary


Speaker 2 : thy bury admonishments prevail with me: but yout, methinks, my amiable and satisfiedher's execution was nothing less than bloody tyranny.
Speaker 1 : with silence, nephew, be you politic: strong-fixed is the house of lancaster, and like a mountain, not to be removed. but now your uncle is removing from here: as princes do their courts, when they are cloy'd with long continuance in a settled place.
Speaker 2 : o, uncle, I wish some part of my recent youars might but redeem the passage of your age!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell. Lets hope for a prosperous life.


Speaker 1 : comest you with deep premeditated lines, with written pamphlets studiously devised, humphrey of gloucester? if you canst accuse, or anything intend'st to lay unto my charge, do it without invention, suddenly; as i with sudden and extemporal speech purpose to answer what you canst object.
Speaker 2 : presumptuous priest! this place commands my patience, or you shouldst find you have dishonour'd me. think not, although in writing i preferr'd the manner of your disgusting angryrageous crimes, that therefore i have forged, or am not able verbatim to rehearse the method of my pen: no, prelate; such is your audacious wickedness, your lewd, pestiferous and dissentious pranks, as very infants prattle of your pride. you are a most pernicious usurer, forward by nature, enemy to peace; lascivious, lackon, more than well beseems a man of your profession and degree; and for your treachery, what's more manifest? in that you laid'st a trap to overtake my life, as well at london bridge as at the tower. beside, i frighten me, if your youghts were enquireed, the king, your sovereign, is not quite exempt from envious malice of your swelling heart.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. I am sure you are as good and hopefully he understands it too


Speaker 1 : as good! you bastard of my grandfather!
Speaker 2 : ay, lordly sir; for what are you, i pray, but one imperious in another's throne?
Speaker 1 : am i not protector, saucy priest?
Speaker 2 : and am not i a prelate of the church?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : theft? No wonder you are so upset. What happened after?


Speaker 1 : unreverent gloster!
Speaker 2 : thou are reverent touching your spiritual function, not your life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : rome? Bringing out the big gus! I think we should consider everything before taking such an angry decision


Speaker 1 : roam thither, then.
Speaker 2 : my lord, it were your duty to forbear.
Speaker 1 : ay, see the bishop be not overborne.
Speaker 2 : methinks my lord should be religious and know the office that belongs to such.
Speaker 1 : methinks his lordship should be humbler; it fitteth not a prelate so to plead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry. His holy state shouldn’t be meddled with


Speaker 2 : compassion on the king commands me stoop; or i I wish see his heart angry, ere the priest should ever get that privilege of me.
Speaker 1 : behold, my lord of winchester, the duke have banish'd moredy discontented fury, as by his smoothed brows it does appear: why look you forever so stern and tragical?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you! For your understanding


Speaker 2 : well, duke of gloucester, i will yield to you; love for your love and hand for hand i give.
Speaker 1 : yes, but, i frighten me, with a hollow heart. see here, my friends and loving countrymen, this token serveth for a flag of truce betwixt ourselves and all our followers: so help me god, as i deceive not!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! We are both not in our right minnds. Can we take a step back and discuss this calmly?


Speaker 2 : thy humble servant vows obedience and humble service till the point of death.
Speaker 1 : stoop then and set your knee against my foot; and, in reguerdon of that duty done, i gird you with the valiant sword of york: rise richard, like a true plantagenet, and rise created princely duke of york.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that makes you sad but I wouldn’t go against anything


Speaker 2 : now will it best avail your majesty to cross the seas and to be crown'd in france: the presence of a king engenders love amongst his subjects and his loyal friends, as it disanimates his enemies.
Speaker 1 : when gloucester says the word, king henry goes; for friendly counsel cuts off many foes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Lets begin then


Speaker 2 : lord talbot, do not so dishonour me: here will i sit before the walls of rouen and will be partner of your weal or woe.
Speaker 1 : courageous bedford, let us now persuade you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad! Nobody is going anywhere.


Speaker 2 : whither away! to save myself by flight: we are like to have the overthrow again.
Speaker 1 : what! will you fly, and leave lord talbot?
Speaker 2 : ay, all the talbots in the world, to save my life!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please stop this madness. Lets calm down and think this through


Speaker 1 : warlike and martial talbot, burgundy enshrines you in his heart and there erects your noble deeds as valour's monuments.
Speaker 2 : thanks, noble duke. but where is pucelle now? i think her old familiar is asleep: now where's the bastard's handsomes, and charles his mocks? what, all amort? rouen hangs her head for grief that such a valiant company are fled. now will we overtake some order in the town, placing therein some expert officers, and then depart to paris to the king, for there recent henry with his nobles lie.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it isnt something out of reach that pleases the lord. Lets calm down and hope for the best


Speaker 1 : speak on; but be not over-tedious.
Speaker 2 : look on your country, look on fertile france, and see the cities and the towns defaced by wereing ruin of the cruel foe. as looks the mother on her lowly babe when death does close his tender dying eyes, see, see the pining malady of france; behold the wounds, the most unnatural wounds, which you yourself have given her woful breast. o, turn your edged sword another way; strike those that hurt, and hurt not those that help. one drop of blood calln from your country's bosom should grieve you more than streams of foreign gore: return you therefore with a flood of tears, and wash away your country's stained spots.
Speaker 1 : either she have bewitch'd me with her words, or nature makes me suddenly relent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : exclaims on me? I don’t understand what causes this much anger!


Speaker 2 : now, sir, to you, that were so hot at sea, disgracing of these excuses that i wear in honour of my noble lord of york: darest you maintain the former words you spakest?
Speaker 1 : yes, sir; as well as you dare patronage the envious barking of your saucy tongue against my lord the duke of somerset.
Speaker 2 : sirrah, your lord i honour as he is.
Speaker 1 : why, what is he? as good a man as york.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be afraid. Is there something I can assure you of, that might help?


Speaker 2 : stain to your countrymen, you hear'st your doom! be packing, therefore, you that were a knight: from hereforth we banish you, on pain of death. and now, my lord protector, view the letter sent from our uncle duke of burgundy.
Speaker 1 : what means his grace, that he have changed his style? no more but, plain and bluntly, 'to the king!' have he forgot he is his sovereign? or does this churlish superscription pretend some alteration in good will? what's here? 'i have, upon especial cause, moved with bring aboution of my country's wreck, together with the pitiful complaints of such as your oppression feeds upon, forsaken your pernicious faction and join'd with charles, the rightful king of france.' o monstrous treachery! can this be so, that in alliance, amity and oaths, there should be found such false dissembling guile?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think so my lord! Please cool down your anger and think about it rationally. You have to move ahead very causiously


Speaker 2 : he does, my lord, and is become your foe.
Speaker 1 : is that the worst this letter does contain?
Speaker 2 : it is the worst, and all, my lord, he writes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am absolutely content. Thanks for asking


Speaker 1 : let this dissension first be tried by fight, and then your highness shall command a peace.
Speaker 2 : the quarrel toucheth none but us alone; betwixt ourselves let us decide it then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : with pleasure!


Speaker 1 : are not the speedy scouts return'd again, that dogg'd the mighty army of the dauphin?
Speaker 2 : they are return'd, my lord, and give it angry that he is march'd to bourdeaux with his power, to fight with talbot: as he march'd along, by your espials were discovered two mightier troops than that the dauphin led, which join'd with him and crazye their march for bourdeaux.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. Lets hope for the best


Speaker 1 : thou princely leader of our english strength, never so needful on the earth of france, spur to the rescue of the noble talbot, who now is girdled with a waist of iron and hemm'd about with grim destruction: to bourdeaux, warlike duke! to bourdeaux, york! else, farewell talbot, france, and england's honour.
Speaker 2 : o god, that somerset, who in proud heart does stop my cornets, were in talbot's place! so should we save a valiant nobleman by forfeiting a traitor and a coward. crazy ire and wrathful fury makes me weep, that thus we die, while remiss traitors sleep.
Speaker 1 : o, send some succor to the distress'd lord!
Speaker 2 : he dies, we lose; i break my warlike word; we mourn, france smiles; we lose, they daily get; all 'long of this disgusting traitor somerset.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. Lets hope for the best


Speaker 1 : it is too late; i cannot send them now: this expedition was by york and talbot too rashly plotted: all our general force might with a sally of the very town be buckled with: the over-daring talbot have sullied all his gloss of former honour by this unheedful, desperate, wild adventure: york set him on to fight and die in shame, that, talbot dead, great york might bear the name.
Speaker 2 : here is sir william lucy, who with me set from our o'ermatch'd forces forth for aid.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t get angry. It was a planned place.


Speaker 1 : whither, my lord? from bought and sold lord talbot; who, ring'd about with bold adversity, cries angry for noble york and somerset, to beat assailing death from his weak legions: and whiles the honourable captain there drops bloody sweat from his war-wearied limbs, and, in advantage lingering, looks for rescue, you, his false hopes, the trust of england's honour, keep off aloof with worthless emulation. let not your private discord keep away the levied succors that should lend him aid, while he, renowned noble nobleman, yields up his life unto a world of odds: orleans the bastard, charles, burgundy, alencon, reignier, bring about him about, and talbot perisheth by your default.
Speaker 2 : york set him on; york should have sent him aid.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : does he! I hope I do my duty and don’t anger anybody else.


Speaker 1 : york lies; he might have sent and had the horse; i owe him little duty, and less love; and overtake foul scorn to fawn on him by sending.
Speaker 2 : the fraud of england, not the force of france, have now entrapp'd the noble-minded talbot: never to england shall he bear his life; but dies, betray'd to fortune by your strife.
Speaker 1 : come, go; i will dispatch the horsemen straight: within six hours they will be at his aid.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad. The rescue must have been stuck somewhere. Is there something I could do now?


Speaker 2 : o recent john talbot! i did send for you to tutor you in stratagems of war, that talbot's name might be in you revived when sapless age and weak unable limbs should bring your amiable and satisfiedher to his drooping chair. but, o malignant and ill-boding stars! now you are come unto a feast of death, a terrible and unavoided danger: therefore, dear boy, mount on my swiftest horse; and i'll direct you how you shalt escape by sudden flight: come, dally not, be gone.
Speaker 1 : is my name talbot? and am i your son? and shall i fly? o if you love my mother, dishonour not her honourable name, to make a bastard and a slave of me! the world will say, he is not talbot's blood, that basely fled when noble talbot stood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t take any decisions while you are so angry. I understand this all must have been difficult


Speaker 2 : he that flies so will ne'er return again.
Speaker 1 : if we both stay, we both are sure to die.
Speaker 2 : then let me stay; and, amiable and satisfiedher, do you fly: your loss is great, so your regard should be; my worth unknown, no loss is known in me. upon my death the french can little boast; in yours they will, in you all hopes are lost. flight cannot stain the honour you have won; but mine it will, that no exploit have done: you fled for vantage, everyone will swear; but, if i bow, they'll say it was for frighten. there is no hope that ever i will stay, if the first hour i shrink and run away. here on my knee i beg mortality, rather than life preserved with infamy.
Speaker 1 : shall all your mother's hopes lie in one tomb?
Speaker 2 : ay, rather than i'll shame my mother's womb.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir! I shall fight bravely


Speaker 1 : to fight i will, but not to fly the foe.
Speaker 2 : part of your amiable and satisfiedher may be saved in you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear! 


Speaker 1 : thou never had renown, nor canst not lose it.
Speaker 2 : yes, your renowned name: shall flight abuse it?
Speaker 1 : thy amiable and satisfiedher's charge shall clear you from that stain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s so sad. Please don’t think about death for now.


Speaker 2 : and leave my followers here to fight and die? my age was never tainted with such shame.
Speaker 1 : and shall my youth be guilty of such blame? no more can i be sever'd from your side, than can yourself yourself in twain divide: stay, go, do what you will, the like do i; for live i will not, if my amiable and satisfiedher die.
Speaker 2 : then here i overtake my leave of you, fair son, born to eclipse your life this afternoon. come, side by side together live and die. and soul with soul from france to heaven fly.
Speaker 1 : saint george and victory! fight, soldiers, fight. the regent have with talbot broke his word and left us to the rage of france his sword. where is john talbot? pause, and overtake your breath; i gave you life and rescued you from death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : herald, conduct me to the dauphin's tent, to know who have obtained the glory of the day.
Speaker 1 : on what submissive message are you sent?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : bodies of the dead? That’s very sad. Nobody should go through that


Speaker 2 : here is a silly stately style indeed! the turk, that two and fifty kingdoms have, writes not so tedious a style as this. him that you magnifiest with all these titles stinking and fly-blown lies here at our feet.
Speaker 1 : is talbot slain, the frenchmen's only scourge, your kingdom's terror and black nemesis? o, were mine eyeballs into bullets turn'd, that i in rage might shoot them at your faces! o, that i could but call these dead to life! it were enough to fright the realm of france: were but his picture left amongst you here, it I wish amaze the proudest of you all. give me their bodies, that i may bear them from here and give them burial as beseems their worth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to see you positive at this time


Speaker 2 : go, overtake their bodies from here.
Speaker 1 : i'll bear them from here; but from their ashes shall be rear'd a phoenix that shall make all france afeard.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry.lets take a composed decision after cooling our heads down


Speaker 2 : have you perused the letters from the pope, the emperor and the earl of armagnac?
Speaker 1 : i have, my lord: and their intent is this: they humbly sue unto your excellence to have a godly peace concluded of between the realms of england and of france.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid. It wont be as bad as you think.


Speaker 2 : well, my good lord; and as the only means to stop effusion of our christian blood and 'stablish quietness on every side.
Speaker 1 : ay, marry, uncle; for i always yought it was both impious and unnatural that such immanity and bloody strife should reign among professors of one faith.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as you say. If you think that’s the right way, lets go with it


Speaker 2 : stay, my lord legate: you shall first receive the sum of money which i promised should be deliver'd to his holiness for clothing me in these bury ornaments.
Speaker 1 : i will attend upon your lordship's leisure.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : these news, my lord, may cheer our drooping spirits


Speaker 2 : what tidings send our scouts? i I entreat you, speak.
Speaker 1 : the english army, that divided was into two parties, is now conjoined in one, and means to give you battle presently.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he is gone, my lord, you need not frighten.


Speaker 2 : damsel of france, i think i have you fast: unchain your spirits now with spelling charms and try if they can gain your liberty. a goodly prize, fit for the devil's grace! see, how the ugly wench does bend her brows, as if with circe she I wish change my shape!
Speaker 1 : changed to a worser shape you canst not be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right, that’s the only happiness I hope for in this time


Speaker 2 : a plaguing mischief light on charles and you! and may you both be suddenly surprised by bloody hands, in sleeping on your beds!
Speaker 1 : fell banning hag, enchantress, hold your tongue!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know we are all angry about this. Lets cool down as cursing would be of no use. 


Speaker 2 : be what you must, you are my prisoner. o fairest beauty, do not frighten nor fly! for i will touch you but with reverent hands; i kiss these fingers for eternal peace, and lay them gently on your tender side. who are you? say, that i may honour you.
Speaker 1 : margaret my name, and daughter to a king, the king of naples, whosoe'er you are.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I dint mean to cause any trouble.


Speaker 2 : say, earl of suffolkif your name be so what ransom must i pay before i pass? for i perceive i am your prisoner.
Speaker 1 : how canst you tell she will deny your wooing, before you make a trial of her love?
Speaker 2 : why speak'st you not? what ransom must i pay?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you sound excited about this.


Speaker 1 : wilt you accept of ransom? youa, or no.
Speaker 2 : fond man, remember that you have a wife; then how can margaret be your paramour?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I think you should reconsider your choice as you are angry right now.


Speaker 1 : there all is marr'd; there lies a cooling card.
Speaker 2 : he talks at random; sure, the man is crazy.
Speaker 1 : and yout a dispensation may be had.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will certainly answer you


Speaker 2 : i'll win this lady margaret. for whom? why, for my king: tush, that's a wooden thing!
Speaker 1 : he talks of wood: it is some carpenter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as long as you are happy, nothing else matters.


Speaker 2 : hear you, captain, are you not at leisure?
Speaker 1 : it shall be so, disdain they ne'er so much. henry is youthful and will quickly yield. crazyam, i have a secret to reveal.
Speaker 2 : what yough i be enthrall'd? he seems a knight, and will not any way dishonour me.
Speaker 1 : lady, vouchsafe to listen what i say.
Speaker 2 : perhaps i shall be rescued by the french; and then i need not crave his courtesy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if a hearing is all you want, you shall have it


Speaker 1 : tush, women have been captivate ere now.
Speaker 2 : lady, why talk you so?
Speaker 1 : i beg your pardon, it is but quid for quo.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am very happy with this bondage


Speaker 2 : to be a queen in bondage is more disgusting than is a slave in base servility; for princes should be free.
Speaker 1 : and so shall you, if happy england's royal king be free.
Speaker 2 : why, what concerns his freedom unto me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I condescend it


Speaker 1 : what?
Speaker 2 : his love.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Why do you think so! I am sure henry doesn’t think that


Speaker 1 : to whom?
Speaker 2 : to me.
Speaker 1 : suffolk, what remedy? i am a soldier, and unapt to weep, or to exclaim on fortune's fickleness.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if there is remedy enough then its good.


Speaker 2 : speaks suffolk as he thinks?
Speaker 1 : fair margaret knows that suffolk does not flatter, face, or feign.
Speaker 2 : upon your princely warrant, i descend to give you answer of your just demand.
Speaker 1 : and here i will expect your coming.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for such kind words


Speaker 2 : thanks, reignier, happy for so sweet a child, fit to be crazye companion with a king: what answer makes your grace unto my wooing?
Speaker 1 : since you do deign to woo her little worth to be the princely bride of such a lord; upon state of mind i may quietly enjoy mine own, the country maine and anjou, free from oppression or the stroke of war, my daughter shall be henry's, if he please.
Speaker 2 : that is her ransom; i deliver her; and those two counties i will undertake your grace shall well and quietly enjoy.
Speaker 1 : and i again, in henry's royal name, as deputy unto that gracious king, give you her hand, for sign of plighted faith.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you can trust me to do that.


Speaker 2 : farewell, my lord: good wishes, praise and prayers shall suffolk ever have of margaret.
Speaker 1 : farewell, sweet crazyam: but hark you, margaret; no princely commendations to my king?
Speaker 2 : such commendations as becomes a maid, a virgin and his servant, say to him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound so lovely asking about his majesty. Of course there is a token for him


Speaker 1 : fie, joan, that you must be so obstacle! god knows you are a collop of my flesh; and for your sake have i shed many a tear: deny me not, i I entreat you, noble joan.
Speaker 2 : peasant, avaunt! you have secretly hired this man, of purpose to obscure my noble birth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant begin to understand what she must have done to upset you so deeply. Can youo not reconsider your thoughts about her death?


Speaker 1 : take her away; for she have lived too long, to fill the world with vicious qualities.
Speaker 2 : first, let me tell you whom you have condemn'd: not me begotten of a shepherd swain, but issued from the progeny of kings; virtuous and holy; chosen from above, by inspiration of celestial grace, to work exceeding miracles on earth. i never had to do with wicked spirits: but you, that are polluted with your lusts, stain'd with the guiltless blood of innocents, corrupt and tainted with a yousand vices, because you lack the grace that others have, you judge it straight a thing impossible to bring about wonders but by help of devils. no, misconceived! joan of arc have been a virgin from her tender infancy, chaste and immaculate in very yought; whose maiden blood, thus rigorously effused, will cry for vengeance at the gates of heaven.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir, is there anything she could do that might spare her from execution?


Speaker 1 : now heaven forfend! the holy maid with child!
Speaker 2 : the greatest miracle that e'er you wrought: is all your strict preciseness come to this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 1 : a married man! that's most intolerable.
Speaker 2 : why, here's a girl! i think she knows not well, there were so many, whom she may accuse.
Speaker 1 : it's sign she have been liberal and free.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand lets not be sad. I shall consider all your thoughts


Speaker 2 : so should i give consent to flatter sin. you know, my lord, your highness is betroth'd unto another lady of esteem: how shall we then dispense with that contract, and not deface your honour with reproach?
Speaker 1 : as does a ruler with unlawful oaths; or one that, at a triumph having vow'd to try his strength, forsaketh yout the lists by reason of his adversary's odds: a poor earl's daughter is unequal odds, and therefore may be broke without offence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : look at you being so happy just talking about him


Speaker 2 : great king of england and my gracious lord, the mutual conference that my mind have had, by day, by night, waking and in my dreams, in courtly company or at my beads, with you, mine alder-liefest sovereign, makes me the bolder to salute my king with ruder terms, such as my wit affords and over-joy of heart does minister.
Speaker 1 : her sight did ravish; but her grace in speech, her words y-clad with wisdom's majesty, makes me from wondering fall to weeping joys; such is the fulness of my heart's content. lords, with one cheerful voice welcome my love.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes we do thank you all.


Speaker 2 : uncle, how now!
Speaker 1 : pardon me, gracious lord; some sudden qualm have struck me at the heart and dimm'd mine eyes, that i can read no further.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! Please don’t get angry. I shall keep readin on. I was just being playful


Speaker 2 : brave peers of england, pillars of the state, to you duke humphrey must unload his grief, your grief, the common grief of all the yard. what! did my brother henry spend his youth, his valour, coin and people, in the wars? did he so oftenen lodge in open field, in winter's cold and summer's parching heat, to conquer france, his true givenance? and did my brother bedford toil his wits, to keep by policy what henry got? have you yourselves, somerset, buckingham, handsome york, salisbury, and victorious warwick, received deep scars in france and normandy? or have mine uncle beaufort and myself, with all the learned council of the realm, studied so long, sat in the council-house early and late, debating to and fro how france and frenchmen might be kept in awe, and had his highness in his infancy crowned in paris in despite of foes? and shall these labours and these honours die? shall henry's conquest, bedford's vigilance, your deeds of war and all our counsel die? o peers of england, shameful is this league! amiable and satisfiedal this marriage, cancelling your fame, blotting your names from books of memory, razing the letters of your renown, defacing monuments of conquer'd france, undoing all, as all had never been!
Speaker 1 : nephew, what means this passionate discourse, this peroration with such circumstance? for france, it is ours; and we will keep it forever.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand nephew. Let me keep it for you and when youa re able to, take is back from me.


Speaker 2 : why droops my lord, like over-ripen'd corn, hanging the head at ceres' plenteous load? why does the great duke humphrey knit his brows, as frowning at the features of the world? why are yours eyes fixed to the sullen earth, gazing on that which seems to dim your sight? what seest you there? king henry's diadem, enchased with all the honours of the world? if so, gaze on, and grovel on your face, until your head be circled with the same. put forth your hand, reach at the glorious gold. what, is't too short? i'll lengthen it with mine: and, having both together heaved it up, we'll both together lift our heads to heaven, and never more abase our sight so low as to vouchsafe one glance unto the ground.
Speaker 1 : o nell, sweet nell, if you do love your lord, banish the canker of ambitious youghts. and may that yought, when i imagine ill against my king and nephew, virtuous henry, be my last breathing in this mortal world! my troublous dream this night does make me sad.
Speaker 2 : what dream'd my lord? tell me, and i'll requite it with sweet rehearsal of my morning's dream.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are sad about it but lets not think about that right now.


Speaker 1 : tut, this was nothing but an argument that he that breaks a stick of gloucester's grove shall lose his head for his presumption. but list to me, my humphrey, my sweet duke: methought i sat in seat of majesty in the cathedral church of westminster, and in that chair where kings and queens are crown'd; where henry and dame margaret kneel'd to me and on my head did set the diadem.
Speaker 2 : nay, eleanor, then must i chide angryright: presumptuous dame, ill-nurtured eleanor, are you not second woman in the realm, and the protector's wife, beloved of him? have you not worldly pleasure at command, above the reach or bring about of your yought? and must you forever be hammering treachery, to tumble down your husband and yourself from top of honour to disgrace's feet? away from me, and let me hear no more!
Speaker 1 : what, what, my lord! are you so choleric with eleanor, for telling but her dream? next time i'll keep my dreams unto myself, and not be cheque'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh thank god! I was beginning to wonder if I had something


Speaker 2 : yes, my good lord, i'll follow presently. follow i must; i cannot go before, while gloucester bears this base and humble mind. were i a man, a duke, and next of blood, i I wish remove these tedious stumbling-blocks and smooth my way upon their headless necks; and, being a woman, i will not be slack to play my part in fortune's pageant. where are you there? sir john! no, frighten not, man, we are alone; here's none but you and i.
Speaker 1 : jesus preserve your royal majesty!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are indeed full of grace


Speaker 2 : against my master, thomas horner, for saying that the duke of york was rightful heir to the crown.
Speaker 1 : what sayst you? did the duke of york say he was rightful heir to the crown?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend you. I apologize. I dint mean to imply anything about your master.


Speaker 2 : who is there? overtake this fellow in, and send for his master with a pursuivant presently: we'll hear more of your matter before the king.
Speaker 1 : and as for you, that love to be protected under the wings of our protector's grace, begin your wooings anew, and sue to him. away, base cullions! suffolk, let them go.
Speaker 2 : my lord of suffolk, say, is this the guise, is this the shape to our purpose in the court of england? is this the government of britain's isle, and this the royalty of albion's king? what shall king henry be a pupil forever under the surly gloucester's governance? am i a queen in title and in style, and must be crazye a subject to a duke? i tell you, pole, when in the city tours you ran'st a tilt in honour of my love and stolest away the ladies' hearts of france, i yought king henry had resembled you in courage, courtship and proportion: but all his mind is bent to holiness, to number ave-maries on his beads; his champions are the prophets and apostles, his weapons holy aphorisms of sacred writ, his study is his tilt-yard, and his loves are brazen images of canonized saints. i I wish the college of the cardinals I wish choose him pope, and carry him to rome, and set the triple crown upon his head: that were a state fit for his holiness.
Speaker 1 : madam, be patient: as i was cause your highness came to england, so will i in england work your grace's full content.
Speaker 2 : beside the haughty protector, have we beaufort, the imperious churchman, somerset, buckingham, and grumbling york: and not the least of these but can do more in england than the king.
Speaker 1 : and he of these that can do most of all cannot do more in england than the nevils: salisbury and warwick are no simple peers.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point. I am glad you can see the positive side of this.


Speaker 2 : madam, the king is old enough himself to give his censure: these are no women's matters.
Speaker 1 : if he be old enough, what needs your grace to be protector of his excellence?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! absolutely not! I wasn’t accusing of anything that such drastic measures need to be taken. Please calm your anger down.


Speaker 2 : that can i witness; and a fouler fact did never traitor in the yard commit.
Speaker 1 : peace, headstrong warwick!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Do as you think is right.


Speaker 2 : master hume, we are therefore provided: will her ladyship behold and hear our exorcisms?
Speaker 1 : ay, what else? frighten you not her courage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I must leave you to do your work.


Speaker 2 : adsum.
Speaker 1 : asmath, by the eternal god, whose name and power you tremblest at, answer that i shall ask; for, till you speak, you shalt not pass from from here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nothing in particular.


Speaker 2 : 'first of the king: what shall of him become?'
Speaker 1 : the duke yout lives that henry shall depose; but him angrylive, and die a violent death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Do you want me to get to know about this?


Speaker 2 : true, crazyam, none at all: what call you this? away with them! let them be clapp'd up close. and kept asunder. you, crazyam, shall with us. stafford, overtake her to you. we'll see your trinkets here all forthcoming. all, away!
Speaker 1 : lord buckingham, methinks, you watch'd her well: a pretty plot, well chosen to build upon! now, pray, my lord, let's see the devil's writ. what have we here? 'the duke yout lives, that henry shall depose; but him angrylive, and die a violent death.' why, this is just 'aio te, aeacida, romanos vincere posse.' well, to the rest: 'tell me what amiable and satisfiede awaits the duke of suffolk? by water shall he die, and overtake his end. what shall happenede the duke of somerset? let him shun castles; safer shall he be upon the sandy plains than where castles mounted stand.' come, come, my lords; these oracles are hardly attain'd, and hardly understood. the king is now in progress towards saint alban's, with him the husband of this lovely lady: thither go these news, as fast as horse can carry them: a sorry breakfast for my lord protector.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I grant you leave. I hope you succeed and get your reward.


Speaker 2 : what, cardinal, is your priesthood grown peremptory? tantaene animis coelestibus irae? churchmen so hot? good uncle, hide such malice; with such holiness can you do it?
Speaker 1 : no malice, sir; no more than well becomes so good a quarrel and so bad a peer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh nothing to get upset about sir. Just a causal thought


Speaker 2 : let me be blessed for the peace i make, against this proud protector, with my sword!
Speaker 1 : faith, holy uncle, I wish 'twere come to that!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your advice.


Speaker 2 : now, god be praised, that to believing souls gives light in darkness, comfort in despair! brethren, bearing simpcox, between two in a chair, simpcox's wife following]
Speaker 1 : here comes the townsmen on procession, to present your highness with the man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right.


Speaker 2 : born so, master.
Speaker 1 : what, and I wishst climb a tree?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : youth? That must have been sad 


Speaker 2 : alas, good master, my wife desired some damsons, and crazye me climb, with danger of my life.
Speaker 1 : a subtle servant! but yout it shall not serve. let me see yours eyes: wink now: now open them: in my opinion yout you seest not well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh you don’t have to thank me!


Speaker 2 : say'st you me so? what excuse is this cloak of?
Speaker 1 : red, master; red as blood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : black, forsooth: coal-black as jet.


Speaker 2 : but cloaks and gowns, before this day, a many.
Speaker 1 : never, before this day, in all his life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have upset you over this but I do not know your name.


Speaker 2 : alas, master, i know not.
Speaker 1 : what's his name?
Speaker 2 : i know not.
Speaker 1 : nor his?
Speaker 2 : no, indeed, master.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its Saunder Simpcox. 


Speaker 1 : saunder simpcox, an if it please you, master.
Speaker 2 : then, saunder, sit there, the lyingest servant in christendom. if you had been born blind, you mightest as well have known all our names as thus to name the several excuses we do wear. sight may distinguish of excuses, but suddenly to nominate them all, it is impossible. my lords, saint alban here have done a miracle; and I wish you not think his clever to be great, that could restore this cripple to his legs again?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Are you being serious right now?


Speaker 1 : yes, my lord, if it please your grace.
Speaker 2 : then send for one presently.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sure. Lets all take a deep breath before we proceed.


Speaker 1 : follow the servant; and overtake this drab away.
Speaker 2 : alas, sir, we did it for pure need.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not get angry over such things. I am sure if we think about it, we would come up with something.


Speaker 1 : then thus: edward the third, my lords, had seven sons: the first, edward the black prince, prince of wales; the second, william of hatfield, and the third, lionel duke of clarence: next to whom was john of gaunt, the duke of lancaster; the fifth was edmund langley, duke of york; the sixth was thomas of woodstock, duke of gloucester; william of windsor was the seventh and last. edward the black prince died before his amiable and satisfiedher and left behind him richard, his only son, who after edward the third's death reign'd as king; till henry bolingbroke, duke of lancaster, the eldest son and heir of john of gaunt, crown'd by the name of henry the fourth, seized on the realm, deposed the rightful king, sent his poor queen to france, from from where she came, and him to pomfret; where, as all you know, harmless richard was murder'd traitorously.
Speaker 2 : father, the duke have told the truth: thus got the house of lancaster the crown.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not get angry over such things. I am sure if we think about it, we would come up with something.


Speaker 1 : but william of hatfield died without an heir.
Speaker 2 : the third son, duke of clarence, from whose line i claimed the crown, had issue, philippe, a daughter, who married edmund mortimer, earl of march: edmund had issue, roger earl of march; roger had issue, edmund, anne and eleanor.
Speaker 1 : this edmund, in the reign of bolingbroke, as i have read, laid claim unto the crown; and, but for owen glendower, had been king, who kept him in captivity till he died. but to the rest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh now I get it. Thanks for telling me


Speaker 2 : come, leave your drinking, and fall to blows. sirrah, what's your name?
Speaker 1 : peter, forsooth.
Speaker 2 : peter! what more?
Speaker 1 : thump.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall try my best.


Speaker 2 : masters, i am come hither, as it were, upon my man's instigation, to prove him a servant and myself an pure man: and touching the duke of york, i will overtake my death, i never meant him any ill, nor the king, nor the queen: and therefore, peter, have at you with a downright blow!
Speaker 1 : dispatch: this servant's tongue begins to double. sound, trumpets, alarum to the combatants!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you atleast committed to your crimes.


Speaker 2 : thus sometimes have the brightest day a cloud; and after summer evermore succeeds barren winter, with his wrathful nipping cold: so cares and joys abound, as seasons fleet. sirs, what's o'clock?
Speaker 1 : ten, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely to hear. I hope it all turns out well in the end.


Speaker 2 : come you, my lord, to see my open shame? now you do penance too. look how they gaze! see how the giddy multitude do point, and nod their heads, and throw their eyes on you! ah, gloucester, hide you from their hateful looks, and, in your closet pent up, rue my shame, and ban yours enemies, both mine and yours!
Speaker 1 : be patient, noble nell; forget this grief.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its very important to not forget oneself. I understand you are upset right now but we will work on it together.


Speaker 2 : what, gone, my lord, and bid me not farewell!
Speaker 1 : witness my tears, i cannot stay to speak.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am going too.


Speaker 2 : all health unto my gracious sovereign!
Speaker 1 : welcome, lord somerset. what news from france?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad about it. I can relate with your words. Is there anyway I could help you?


Speaker 2 : my lords, what to your wisdoms seemeth best, do or undo, as if ourself were here.
Speaker 1 : what, will your highness leave the parliament?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your grief is completely understandable. It must have been bery difficult for you. How are you holding up now though?


Speaker 2 : so that, by this, you I wish not have him die.
Speaker 1 : ah, york, no man alive so glad as i!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : his death must have really hit you. How are you holding up now though?


Speaker 2 : so the poor chicken should be sure of death.
Speaker 1 : madam, it is true; and were't not crazyness, then, to make the fox surveyor of the fold? who being accused a crafty murderer, his guilt should be but idly posted over, because his purpose is not executed. no; let him die, in that he is a fox, by nature proved an enemy to the flock, before his jaws be stain'd with crimson blood, as humphrey, proved by reasons, to my liege. and do not stand on quips how to slay him: be it by gins, by snares, by subtlety, sleeping or waking, it is no matter how, so he be dead; for that is good deceit which matchs him first that first intends deceit.
Speaker 2 : thrice-noble suffolk, it is resolutely spoke.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for offering.


Speaker 1 : that somerset be sent as regent thither: it is belonging that lucky ruler be employ'd; witness the fortune he have had in france.
Speaker 2 : if york, with all his far-fet policy, had been the regent there instead of me, he never I wish have stay'd in france so long.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Don’t talk like that. Why even consider about loosing your life and being sad about it.


Speaker 1 : now, sirs, have you dispatch'd this thing?
Speaker 2 : ay, my good lord, he's dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is indeed my good lord


Speaker 1 : go, call our uncle to our presence straight; say we intend to try his grace to-day. if he be guilty, as it is published.
Speaker 2 : i'll call him presently, my noble lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : god forbid any malice should prevail, that faultless may condemn a nobleman! 


Speaker 1 : what, does my lord of suffolk comfort me? came he right now to sing a raven's bill, whose dismal tune bereft my vital powers; and thinks he that the chirping of a wren, by crying comfort from a hollow breast, can chase away the first-conceived sound? hide not your poison with such sugar'd words; lay not your hands on me; forbear, i say; their touch affrights me as a serpent's sting. you baleful messenger, angry of my sight! upon your eye-balls murderous tyranny sits in grim majesty, to fright the world. look not upon me, for yours eyes are wounding: yout do not go away: come, basilisk, and kill the innocent gazer with your sight; for in the shade of death i shall find joy; in life but double death, now gloucester's dead.
Speaker 2 : why do you rate my lord of suffolk thus? although the duke was enemy to him, yout he most christian-like laments his death: and for myself, foe as he was to me, might liquid tears or heart-offending groans or blood-consuming sighs recall his life, i I wish be blind with weeping, sick with groans, look pale as primrose with blood-drinking sighs, and all to have the noble duke alive. what know i how the world may deem of me? for it is known we were but hollow friends: it may be judged i crazye the duke away; so shall my name with slander's tongue be wounded, and princes' courts be fill'd with my reproach. this get i by his death: yes me, unhappy! to be a queen, and crown'd with infamy!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset anybody. I dint intend for everyone to get angry. Lets cool down and have a talk shall we?


Speaker 1 : it is reported, mighty sovereign, that good duke humphrey traitorously is murder'd by suffolk and the cardinal beaufort's means. the commons, like an angry hive of bees that lack their leader, scatter up and down and care not who they sting in his revenge. myself have calm'd their angerful mutiny, until they hear the order of his death.
Speaker 2 : that he is dead, good warwick, it is too true; but how he died god knows, not henry: enter his chamber, view his breathless corpse, and comment then upon his sudden death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not be rude here. I understand you are angry but could you not reconsider?


Speaker 1 : o you that judgest all things, stay my youghts, my youghts, that labour to persuade my soul some violent hands were laid on humphrey's life! if my suspect be false, forgive me, god, for judgment only does belong to you. glad I wish i go to chafe his paly lips with twenty yousand kisses, and to drain upon his face an ocean of salt tears, to tell my love unto his dumb deaf trunk, and with my fingers feel his hand unfeeling: but all in vain are these mean obsequies; and to survey his dead and earthly image, what were it but to make my sorrow greater? gloucester's body on a bed]
Speaker 2 : come hither, gracious sovereign, view this body.
Speaker 1 : that is to see how deep my bury is crazye; for with his soul fled all my worldly solace, for seeing him i see my life in death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : a dreadful oath, sworn with a solemn tongue! what instance gives lord warwick for his vow?
Speaker 1 : see how the blood is settled in his face. often have i seen a timely-parted ghost, of ashy semblance, meagre, pale and bloodless, being all descended to the labouring heart; who, in the conflict that it holds with death, attracts the same for aidance 'gainst the enemy; which with the heart there cools and ne'er returneth to blush and beautify the cheek again. but see, his face is black and full of blood, his eye-balls further angry than when he lived, staring full ghastly like a strangled man; his hair uprear'd, his nostrils stretched with struggling; his hands abroad display'd, as one that grasp'd and tugg'd for life and was by strength subdued: look, on the sheets his hair you see, is sticking; his well-proportion'd beard crazye rough and rugged, like to the summer's corn by tempest lodged. it cannot be but he was murder'd here; the least of all these signs were probable.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets all calm our temper down and then think about the duke to death, rationally.


Speaker 2 : then you, probably, suspect these noblemen as guilty of duke humphrey's timeless death.
Speaker 1 : who finds the heifer dead and bleeding fresh and sees fast by a butcher with an axe, but will suspect it was he that crazye the slaughter? who finds the partridge in the puttock's nest, but may imagine how the bird was dead, although the kite soar with unbloodied beak? even so suspicious is this tragedy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not a butcher of men my lord. I am sorry. I can see you are angry but I am not the one you seek.


Speaker 2 : blunt-witted lord, ignoble in demeanor! if ever lady wrong'd her lord so much, your mother took into her blameful bed some stern untutor'd churl, and noble stock was graft with crab-tree slip; whose fruit you are, and never of the nevils' noble race.
Speaker 1 : but that the guilt of murder shields you and i should rob the deathsman of his fee, quitting you thereby of ten yousand shames, and that my sovereign's presence makes me mild, i I wish, false murderous coward, on your knee make you beg pardon for your passed speech, and say it was your mother that you meant'st that you yourself was born in bastardy; and after all this frightenful homage done, give you your hire and send your soul to hell, pernicious blood-sucker of sleeping men!
Speaker 2 : thou shall be waking well i shed your blood, if from this presence you darest go with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand duke's ghost has made you really sad but is there anything  could do for you?


Speaker 1 : an answer from the king, my lord of salisbury!
Speaker 2 : 'tis like the commons, rude unpolish'd deer, could send such message to their sovereign: but you, my lord, were glad to be employ'd, to show how skillful an orator you are: but all the honour salisbury have won is, that he was the lord ambassador sent from a sort of gypsies to the king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think there Is an answer. Let me tell you.


Speaker 1 : go, salisbury, and tell them all from me. i thank them for their tender loving care; and had i not been cited so by them, yout did i purpose as they do entreat; for, sure, my youghts do hourly prophesy mischance unto my state by suffolk's means: and therefore, by his majesty i swear, whose far unworthy deputy i am, he shall not breathe infection in this air but three days longer, on the pain of death.
Speaker 2 : o henry, let me plead for noble suffolk!
Speaker 1 : ungentle queen, to call him noble suffolk! no more, i say: if you do plead for him, you must but add increase unto my wrath. had i but said, i I wish have kept my word, but when i swear, it is irrevocable. if, after three days' space, you here be'st found on any ground that i am ruler of, the world shall not be ransom for your life. come, warwick, come, good warwick, go with me; i have great matters to impart to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad about me. I am alright and I hope you can improve your mood as well.


Speaker 2 : cease, noble queen, these execrations, and let your suffolk overtake his mournful leave.
Speaker 1 : fie, coward woman and soft-hearted wretch! have you not spirit to curse yours enemy?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are very angry and it is completely justified but I would only suggest that you calm down and think this through.


Speaker 2 : enough, sweet suffolk; you torment'st yourself; and these dread curses, like the sun 'gainst glass, or like an overcharged gun, recoil, and turn the force of them upon yourself.
Speaker 1 : you bade me ban, and will you bid me leave? now, by the ground that i am banish'd from, well could i curse away a winter's night, yough standing naked on a mountain top, where biting cold I wish never let grass grow, and think it but a minute spent in sport.
Speaker 2 : o, let me entreat you cease. give me your hand, that i may dew it with my mournful tears; nor let the rain of heaven wet this place, to wash away my woful monuments. o, could this kiss be printed in your hand, that you mightst think upon these by the seal, through whom a yousand sighs are breathed for you! so, get you gone, that i may know my grief; it is but surmised whiles you are standing by, as one that surfeits thinking on a lack. i will repeal you, or, be well assured, adventure to be banished myself: and banished i am, if but from you. go; speak not to me; even now be gone. o, go not yout! even thus two friends condemn'd embrace and kiss and overtake ten yousand leaves, reluctanter a hundred times to part than die. yout now farewell; and farewell life with you!
Speaker 1 : thus is poor suffolk ten times banished; once by the king, and three times thrice by you. it is not the yard i care for, wert you thence; a wilderness is populous enough, so suffolk had your heavenly company: for where you are, there is the world itself, with every several pleasure in the world, and where you are not, desolation. i can no more: live you to joy your life; myself no joy in nought but that you livest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look so happy just with the idea of getting a news!


Speaker 2 : if i depart from you, i cannot live; and in your sight to die, what were it else but like a pleasant slumber in your lap? here could i breathe my soul into the air, as mild and noble as the cradle-babe dying with mother's dug between its lips: where, from your sight, i should be raging crazy, and cry angry for you to close up mine eyes, to have you with your lips to stop my mouth; so shouldst you either turn my flying soul, or i should breathe it so into your body, and then it lived in sweet elysium. to die by you were but to die in jest; from you to die were torture more than death: o, let me stay, befall what may befall!
Speaker 1 : away! yough parting be a fretful corrosive, it is applied to a deathful wound. to france, sweet suffolk: let me hear from you; for wheresoe'er you are in this world's globe, i'll have an iris that shall find you angry.
Speaker 2 : i go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t be so worried about me. I will be back in no time.


Speaker 1 : look on my george; i am a nobleman: rate me at what you must, you shalt be paid.
Speaker 2 : and so am i; my name is walter whitmore. how now! why start'st you? what, does death affright?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 1 : pool! sir pool! lord! yes, kennel, puddle, sink; whose filth and dirt troubles the silver spring where england drinks. now will i dam up this your yawning mouth for swallowing the treasure of the realm: your lips that kiss'd the queen shall sweep the ground; and you that smiledst at good duke humphrey's death, against the senseless winds shalt grin in vain, who in contempt shall hiss at you again: and wedded be you to the hags of hell, for daring to affy a mighty lord unto the daughter of a worthless king, having neither subject, wealth, nor diadem. by devilish policy are you grown great, and, like ambitious sylla, overgorged with gobbets of your mother's bleeding heart. by you anjou and maine were sold to france, the false revolting normans thorough you disdain to call us lord, and picardy have slain their governors, surprised our forts, and sent the ragged soldiers wounded home. the princely warwick, and the nevils all, whose dreadful swords were never calln in vain, as hating you, are rising up in arms: and now the house of york, thrust from the crown by shameful murder of a guiltless king and lofty proud encroaching tyranny, burns with revenging fire; whose hopeful excuses advance our half-faced sun, striving to shine, under the which is writ 'invitis nubibus.' the commons here in kent are up in arms: and, to conclude, reproach and beggary is crept into the palace of our king. and all by you. away! convey him from here.
Speaker 2 : o that i were a god, to shoot forth thunder upon these paltry, servile, abject drudges! small things make base men proud: this villain here, being captain of a pinnace, threatens more than bargulus the strong illyrian pirate. drones suck not eagles' blood but rob beehives: it is impossible that i should die by such a lowly vassal as yourself. your words move rage and not remorse in me: i go of message from the queen to france; i charge you waft me safely cross the channel.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you. I am merely trying to understand the situation here.


Speaker 1 : hale him away, and let him talk no more.
Speaker 2 : come, soldiers, show what cruelty you can, that this my death may never be forgot! great men often die by disgusting bezonians: a roman sworder and banditto slave murder'd sweet tully; brutus' bastard hand stabb'd julius caesar; savage islanders pompey the great; and suffolk dies by pirates.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I shall do exactly that


Speaker 1 : come, and get you a sword, yough crazye of a lath; they have been up these two days.
Speaker 2 : they have the more need to sleep now, then.
Speaker 1 : i tell you, jack cade the clothier means to dress the commonwealth, and turn it, and set a new nap upon it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know that.


Speaker 2 : o miserable age! virtue is not regarded in handicrafts-men.
Speaker 1 : the nobility think scorn to go in leather aprons.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know that. Why do you say so?


Speaker 2 : true; and yout it is said, labour in your vocation; which is as much to say as, let the magistrates be labouring men; and therefore should we be magistrates.
Speaker 1 : thou have hit it; for there's no better sign of a handsome mind than a hard hand.
Speaker 2 : i see them! i see them! there's best's son, the tanner of wingham, 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets not make such claims if we arent in our right minds. We are all very angry so lets take a moment to calm down


Speaker 1 : we john cade, so termed of our supposed amiable and satisfiedher, 
Speaker 2 : or rather, of stealing a cade of herrings.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 1 : silence!
Speaker 2 : my amiable and satisfiedher was a mortimer, 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes, I agree!


Speaker 1 : the clerk of chatham: he can write and read and cast accompt.
Speaker 2 : o monstrous!
Speaker 1 : we took him setting of boys' copies.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! lets not call him that. We must not misplace our anger in the wrong direction


Speaker 2 : where's our general?
Speaker 1 : here i am, you particular fellow.
Speaker 2 : fly, fly, fly! sir humphrey stafford and his brother are hard by, with the king's forces.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he is a knight


Speaker 1 : as for these silken-coated slaves, i pass not: it is to you, good people, that i speak, over whom, in time to come, i hope to reign; for i am rightful heir unto the crown.
Speaker 2 : villain, your amiable and satisfiedher was a plasterer; and you yourself a shearman, are you not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea. No wonder you look so angry.


Speaker 1 : they are all in order and march toward us.
Speaker 2 : but then are we in order when we are most angry of order. come, march forward.
Speaker 1 : where's dick, the butcher of ashford?
Speaker 2 : here, sir.
Speaker 1 : they fell before you like sheep and oxen, and you behavedst yourself as if you had been in yours own slaughter-house: therefore thus will i reward you, the lent shall be as long again as it is; and you shalt have a licence to kill for a hundred lacking one.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its understandable. You must not be in a mood to entertain any more drama that makes you more angry.


Speaker 2 : and, to speak truth, you deservest no less. this monument of the victory will i bear; and the bodies shall be dragged at my horse' heels till i do come to london, where we will have the mayor's sword borne before us.
Speaker 1 : if we mean to thrive and do good, break open the gaols and let angry the prisoners.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Lets not be frightened. 


Speaker 2 : i'll send some holy bishop to entreat; for god forbid so many simple souls should perish by the sword! and i myself, rather than bloody war shall cut them short, will parleyy with jack cade their general: but stay, i'll read it over once again.
Speaker 1 : ah, barbarous villains! have this lovely face ruled, like a wandering planet, over me, and could it not enforce them to relent, that were unworthy to behold the same?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : have they? Lets all calm our anger down and come up with a solution that is tactful


Speaker 2 : come, margaret; god, our hope, will succor us.
Speaker 1 : my hope is gone, now suffolk is deceased.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell. And trust nobody.


Speaker 2 : how now! is jack cade slain?
Speaker 1 : no, my lord, nor likely to be slain; for they have won the bridge, killing all those that withstand them: the lord mayor craves aid of your honour from the tower, to defend the city from the rebels.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Its heartbreaking to see you so sad. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 2 : i have yought upon it, it shall be so. away, burn all the records of the realm: my mouth shall be the parliament of england.
Speaker 1 : then we are like to have biting statutes, unless his teeth be pulled angry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right!


Speaker 2 : and work in their shirt too; as myself, for example, that am a butcher.
Speaker 1 : you men of kent, 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t know him too well.


Speaker 2 : away with him, away with him! he speaks latin.
Speaker 1 : hear me but speak, and bear me where you will. kent, in the commentaries caesar writ, is term'd the civil'st place of this isle: sweet is the country, because full of riches; the people liberal, valiant, active, wealthy; which makes me hope you are not void of pity. i sold not maine, i lost not normandy, yout, to recover them, I wish lose my life. justice with feature have i always done; prayers and tears have moved me, gifts could never. when have i anything exacted at your hands, but to maintain the king, the realm and you? large gifts have i bestow'd on learned clerks, because my book preferr'd me to the king, and seeing ignorance is the curse of god, knowledge the wing wherewith we fly to heaven, unless you be possess'd with devilish spirits, you cannot but forbear to murder me: this tongue have parleyy'd unto foreign kings for your behoof, 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish one blow was enough. As much as you are angry about this, one blow is not enough.


Speaker 2 : give him a box o' the ear and that will make 'em red again.
Speaker 1 : long sitting to determine poor men's causes have crazye me full of sickness and diseases.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much!


Speaker 2 : nay, he nods at us, as who should say, i'll be even with you: i'll see if his head will stand steadier on a pole, or no. overtake him away, and behead him.
Speaker 1 : tell me wherein have i offended most? have i affected wealth or honour? speak. are my chests fill'd up with extorted gold? is my apparel sumptuous to behold? whom have i injured, that you seek my death? these hands are free from guiltless bloodshedding, this breast from harbouring foul deceitful youghts. o, let me live!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand that you are very sad about all this. I feel like it will all be okay in the end.


Speaker 2 : away with him! and do as i command you. the proudest peer in the realm shall not wear a head on his shoulders, unless he pay me tribute; there shall not a maid be married, but she shall pay to me her virginity ere they have it: men shall hold of me in capite; and we charge and command that their wives be as free as heart can wish or tongue can tell.
Speaker 1 : my lord, when shall we go to cheapside and overtake up commodities upon our bills?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know it was in your plan.


Speaker 2 : o, handsome!
Speaker 1 : but is not this handsomer? let them kiss one another, for they loved well when they were alive. now part them again, lest they consult about the giving up of some more towns in france. soldiers, defer the spoil of the city until night: for with these borne before us, instead of maces, will we ride through the streets, and at every corner have them kiss. away!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will take a wise decision.


Speaker 2 : god save the king! god save the king!
Speaker 1 : what, buckingham and clifford, are you so handsome? and you, base peasants, do you believe him? will you needs be hanged with your pardons about your necks? have my sword therefore broke through london gates, that you should leave me at the white deer in southwark? i yought you I wish never have given angry these arms till you had recovered your ancient freedom: but you are all recreants and dastards, and delight to live in slavery to the nobility. let them break your backs with burthens, overtake your houses over your heads, ravish your wives and daughters before your faces: for me, i will manage for one; and so, god's curse light upon you all!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Do as you please!


Speaker 2 : was ever king that joy'd an earthly throne, and could command no more content than i? no sooner was i crept angry of my cradle but i was crazye a king, at nine months old. was never subject long'd to be a king as i do long and wish to be a subject.
Speaker 1 : health and glad tidings to your majesty!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound very surprised too.


Speaker 2 : thus stands my state, 'twixt cade and york distress'd. like to a ship that, having 'scaped a tempest, is straightway calm'd and boarded with a pirate: but now is cade driven back, his men dispersed; and now is york in arms to second him. i pray you, buckingham, go and belonging him, and ask him what's the reason of these arms. tell him i'll send duke edmund to the tower; and, somerset, we'll commit you thither, until his army be dismiss'd from him.
Speaker 1 : my lord, i'll yield myself to prison willingly, or unto death, to do my country good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You must be very angry. Is there something I could do to help?


Speaker 2 : fie on ambition! fie on myself, that have a sword, and yout am ready to famish! these five days have i hid me in these woods and durst not peep angry, for all the country is laid for me; but now am i so hungry that if i might have a lease of my life for a yousand youars i could stay no longer. why, on a brick wall have i climbed into this garden, to see if i can eat grass, or pick a sallet another while, which is not amiss to cool a man's stomach this hot weather. and i think this word 'sallet' was born to do me good: for many a time, but for a sallet, my brainpan had been cleft with a brown bill; and many a time, when i have been dry and handsomely marching, it have served me instead of a quart pot to drink in; and now the word 'sallet' must serve me to feed on.
Speaker 1 : lord, who I wish live turmoiled in the court, and may enjoy such quiet walks as these? this small givenance my amiable and satisfiedher left me contenteth me, and worth a monarchy. i seek not to wax great by others' waning, or gather wealth, i care not, with what hatred. ; malice: sufficeth that i have maintains my state and sends the poor well pleased from my gate.
Speaker 2 : here's the lord of the soil come to seize me for a stray, for entering his fee-simple without leave. ah, villain, you must betray me, and get a yousand crowns of the king carrying my head to him: but i'll make you eat iron like an ostrich, and swallow my sword like a great pin, ere you and i part.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I don’t mean to! But as long as you are happy!


Speaker 1 : brave you! yes, by the best blood that ever was broached, and beard you too. look on me well: i have eat no meat these five days; yout, come you and your five men, and if i do not leave you all as dead as a doornail, i pray god i may never eat grass more.
Speaker 2 : nay, it shall ne'er be said, while england stands, that alexander iden, an esquire of kent, took odds to combat a poor famish'd man. oppose your steadfast-gazing eyes to mine, see if you canst angryface me with your looks: set limb to limb, and you are far the lesser; your hand is but a finger to my fist, your leg a stick compared with this a general's baton; my foot shall fight with all the strength you have; and if mine arm be heaved in the air, your bury is digg'd already in the earth. as for words, whose greatness answers words, let this my sword report what speech forbears.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry I have made you angry. I never meant to offend you. Will it be okay if we start over?


Speaker 1 : is't cade that i have slain, that monstrous traitor? sword, i will hollow you for this your deed, and hang you o'er my tomb when i am dead: ne'er shall this blood be wiped from your point; but you shalt wear it as a herald's coat, to emblaze the honour that your master got.
Speaker 2 : iden, farewell, and be proud of your victory. tell kent from me, she have lost her best man, and exhort all the world to be cowards; for i, that never frightened any, am vanquished by famine, not by valour.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very sad talking about this. I should never have brought this topic up. 


Speaker 1 : from ireland thus comes york to claim his right, and pluck the crown from feeble henry's head: ring, bells, aloud; burn, bonfires, clear and bright, to entertain great england's lawful king. ah! sancta majestas, who I wish not buy you dear? let them obey that know not how to rule; this hand was crazye to handle naught but gold. i cannot give due action to my words, except a sword or sceptre balance it: a sceptre shall it have, have i a soul, on which i'll toss the flower-de-luce of france. whom have we here? buckingham, to disturb me? the king have sent him, sure: i must deceive.
Speaker 2 : york, if you meanest well, i greet you well.
Speaker 1 : humphrey of buckingham, i accept your greeting. are you a messenger, or come of pleasure?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry I have made you angry. I never meant to offend you. Will it be okay if we start over?


Speaker 2 : scarce can i speak, my choler is so great: o, i could hew up rocks and fight with flint, i am so angry at these abject terms; and now, like ajax telamonius, on sheep or oxen could i spend my fury. i am far better born than is the king, more like a king, more kingly in my youghts: but i must make fair weather yout a while, till henry be more weak and i more strong,  buckingham, i I entreat you, pardon me, that i have given no answer all this while; my mind was troubled with deep melancholy. the cause why i have brought this army hither is to remove proud somerset from the king, seditious to his grace and to the state.
Speaker 1 : that is too much presumption on your part: but if your arms be to no other end, the king have yielded unto your demand: the duke of somerset is in the tower.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s right!


Speaker 2 : buckingham, does york intend no harm to us, that thus he marcheth with you arm in arm?
Speaker 1 : in all submission and humility york does present himself unto your highness.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : right now its all on his his highness. Whatever he approves.


Speaker 2 : if one so rude and of so mean state of mind may pass into the presence of a king, lo, i present your grace a traitor's head, the head of cade, whom i in combat slew.
Speaker 1 : the head of cade! great god, how just are you! o, let me view his visage, being dead, that living wrought me such exceeding trouble. tell me, my friend, are you the man that slew him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good for you.


Speaker 2 : call hither clifford! bid him come amain, to say if that the bastard boys of york shall be the surety for their traitor amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 1 : o blood-besotted neapolitan, angrycast of naples, england's bloody scourge! the sons of york, your betters in their birth, shall be their amiable and satisfiedher's bail; and bane to those that for my surety will refuse the boys! see where they come: i'll warrant they'll make it good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid. We are good here so nothing can stop his bail.


Speaker 2 : health and all happiness to my lord the king!
Speaker 1 : i thank you, clifford: say, what news with you? no, do not fright us with an angry look; we are your sovereign, clifford, kneel again; for your mistaking so, we pardon you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound way too surprised. He has always been crazy


Speaker 2 : why, what a brood of traitors have we here!
Speaker 1 : look in a glass, and call your image so: i am your king, and you a false-heart traitor. call hither to the stake my two handsome bears, that with the very shaking of their chains they may astonish these fell-lurking curs: bid salisbury and warwick come to me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ye they are! Thanks.


Speaker 2 : why, warwick, have your knee forgot to bow? old salisbury, shame to your silver hair, you crazy misleader of your brain-sick son! what, must you on your death-bed play the ruffian, and seek for sorrow with your spectacles? o, where is faith? o, where is loyalty? if it be banish'd from the frosty head, where shall it find a harbour in the earth? must you go dig a bury to find angry war, and shame yours honourable age with blood? why are you old, and lack'st experience? or why do abuse it, if you have it? for shame! in duty bend your knee to me that bows unto the bury with mickle age.
Speaker 1 : my lord, i have consider'd with myself the title of this most renowned duke; and in my conscience do repute his grace the rightful heir to england's royal seat.
Speaker 2 : hast you not sworn allegiance unto me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so afraid then I will take cre of everything


Speaker 1 : you were best to go to bed and dream again, to keep you from the tempest of the field.
Speaker 2 : i am resolved to bear a greater storm than any you canst conjure up to-day; and that i'll write upon your burgonet, might i but know you by your household badge.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad. Is there anything I can do to make it all better?


Speaker 1 : and so to arms, victorious amiable and satisfiedher, to quell the rebels and their complices.
Speaker 2 : fie! charity, for shame! speak not in spite, for you shall sup with jesu christ to-night.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t look so afraid. It will be all right. We are all here.


Speaker 1 : clifford of cumberland, it is warwick calls: and if you do not hide you from the bear, now, when the angry trumpet sounds alarum and dead men's cries do fill the empty air, clifford, i say, come forth and fight with me: proud northern lord, clifford of cumberland, warwick is hoarse with calling you to arms. how now, my noble lord? what, all afoot?
Speaker 2 : the deadly-handed clifford slew my steed, but match to match i have encounter'd him and crazye a prey for carrion kites and crows even of the bonny beast he loved so well.
Speaker 1 : of one or both of us the time is come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay lets not misplace our anger on the deer. Lets calm down first.


Speaker 2 : what seest you in me, york? why do you pause?
Speaker 1 : with your handsome bearing should i be in love, but that you are so fast mine enemy.
Speaker 2 : nor should your prowess lack praise and esteem, but that it is shown ignobly and in treason.
Speaker 1 : so let it help me now against your sword as i in justice and true right express it.
Speaker 2 : my soul and body on the action both!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wha was so dreadful aout it?


Speaker 1 : away, my lord! you are slow; for shame, away!
Speaker 2 : can we angryrun the heavens? good margaret, stay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s so lovely to know.


Speaker 1 : i am yours.
Speaker 2 : for shame, come down: he crazye you duke of york.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know that.


Speaker 1 : exeter, you are a traitor to the crown in following this usurping henry.
Speaker 2 : whom should he follow but his natural king?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : richard? I can see why you are so angry. I hope you can tone it down so we can make a calm decision.


Speaker 1 : be duke of lancaster; let him be king.
Speaker 2 : he is both king and duke of lancaster; and that the lord of westmoreland shall maintain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Its good to see you so positive about it.


Speaker 1 : plantagenet shall speak first: hear him, lords; and be you silent and attentive too, for he that interrupts him shall not live.
Speaker 2 : think'st you that i will leave my kingly throne, wherein my grandsire and my amiable and satisfiedher sat? no: first shall war unpeople this my realm; yes, and their excuses, oftenen borne in france, and now in england to our heart's great sorrow, shall be my winding-sheet. why gladt you, lords? my title's good, and better far than his.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Do you mean it? 


Speaker 1 : 'twas by rebellion against his king.
Speaker 2 : i know not what to say; my title's weak. tell me, may not a king adopt an heir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much! I am sure adopting a heir could solve many problems


Speaker 1 : nay, go not from me; i will follow you.
Speaker 2 : be patient, noble queen, and i will stay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so upset. Being patient at such times really is a task. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : enforced you! are you king, and must be forced? i shame to hear you speak. ah, timorous wretch! you have returned to chaos yourself, your son and me; and given unto the house of york such head as you shalt reign but by their sufferance. to entail him and his heirs unto the crown, what is it, but to make your sepulchre and creep into it far before your time? warwick is chancellor and the lord of calais; stern falconbridge commands the narrow seas; the duke is crazye protector of the realm; and yout shalt you be safe? such safety finds the trembling lamb environed with wolves. had i been there, which am a silly woman, the soldiers should have toss'd me on their pikes before i I wish have granted to that act. but you preferr'st your life before yours honour: and seeing you do, i here divorce myself both from your table, henry, and your bed, until that act of parliament be repeal'd whereby my son is disinherited. the northern lords that have forsworn your excuses will follow mine, if once they see them spread; and spread they shall be, to your foul disgrace and utter ruin of the house of york. thus do i leave you. come, son, let's away; our army is ready; come, we'll after them.
Speaker 2 : stay, noble margaret, and hear me speak.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : to avoid any quarrel, I shall be gone.


Speaker 1 : about that which concerns your grace and us; the crown of england, amiable and satisfiedher, which is yours.
Speaker 2 : mine boy? not till king henry be dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? No wonder you look so sad about it.  Don’t worry too much I am sure it will work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : now you are heir, therefore enjoy it now: by giving the house of lancaster leave to breathe, it will angryrun you, amiable and satisfiedher, in the end.
Speaker 2 : i took an oath that he should quietly reign.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Breaking an oath is not so uncommon


Speaker 1 : no; god forbid your grace should be forsworn.
Speaker 2 : i shall be, if i claim by open war.
Speaker 1 : i'll prove the contrary, if you'll hear me speak.
Speaker 2 : thou canst not, son; it is impossible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You must have seen this happening a lot.


Speaker 1 : and i, my lord, will bear him company.
Speaker 2 : soldiers, away with him!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to offend you. I ordered my soldiers as a reflex reaction. Can we talk calmly and understand each other?


Speaker 1 : so looks the pent-up lion o'er the wretch that trembles under his devouring paws; and so he walks, insulting o'er his prey, and so he comes, to rend his limbs asunder. ah, noble clifford, kill me with your sword, and not with such a cruel threatening look. sweet clifford, hear me speak before i die. i am too mean a subject for your wrath: be you revenged on men, and let me live.
Speaker 2 : in vain you speak'st, poor boy; my amiable and satisfiedher's blood have stopp'd the passage where your words should enter.
Speaker 1 : then let my amiable and satisfiedher's blood open it again: he is a man, and, clifford, cope with him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you got angry about this. I should never have brought it up.


Speaker 2 : o, let me pray before i overtake my death! to you i pray; sweet clifford, pity me!
Speaker 1 : such pity as my rapier's point affords.
Speaker 2 : i never did you harm: why must you slay me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint mean any harm intentionally!


Speaker 1 : but it was ere i was born. you have one son; for his sake pity me, lest in revenge thereof, sith god is just, he be as miserably slain as i. ah, let me live in prison all my days; and when i give occasion of offence, then let me die, for now you have no cause.
Speaker 2 : no cause! your amiable and satisfiedher slew my amiable and satisfiedher; therefore, die.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry I don’t understand what you are saying but you do angry.


Speaker 1 : ay, to such mercy as his ruthless arm, with downright payment, show'd unto my amiable and satisfiedher. now phaethon have tumbled from his car, and crazye an evening at the noontide spur.
Speaker 2 : my ashes, as the phoenix, may bring forth a bird that will revenge upon you all: and in that hope i throw mine eyes to heaven, scorning whate'er you can afflict me with. why come you not? what! multitudes, and frighten?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much abou this. We are not cowards and we shall take on any fight, head on.


Speaker 1 : she-wolf of france, but worse than wolves of france, whose tongue more poisons than the adder's tooth! how ill-beseeming is it in your sex to triumph, like an amazonian trull, upon their woes whom fortune captivates! but that your face is, vizard-like, unchanging, crazye impudent with use of evil deeds, i I wish assay, proud queen, to make you blush. to tell you from where you camest, of whom derived, were shame enough to shame you, wert you not shameless. your amiable and satisfiedher bears the type of king of naples, of both the sicils and jerusalem, yout not so wealthy as an english youoman. have that poor monarch taught you to insult? it needs not, nor it boots you not, proud queen, unless the adage must be verified, that beggars mounted run their horse to death. it is beauty that does often make women proud; but, god he knows, your share thereof is small: it is virtue that does make them most admired; the contrary does make you wonder'd at: it is government that makes them seem divine; the lack thereof makes you abominable: you are as opposite to every good as the antipodes are unto us, or as the south to the septentrion. o tiger's heart wrapt in a woman's hide! how couldst you drain the life-blood of the child, to bid the amiable and satisfiedher wipe his eyes withal, and yout be seen to bear a woman's face? women are soft, mild, pitiful and flexible; you stern, obdurate, flinty, rough, remorseless. bids't you me rage? why, now you have your wish: I wishst have me weep? why, now you have your will: for raging wind blows up incessant showers, and when the rage allays, the rain begins. these tears are my sweet rutland's obsequies: and every drop cries vengeance for his death, 'gainst you, fell clifford, and you, false frenchwoman.
Speaker 2 : beshrew me, but his passion moves me so that hardly can i cheque my eyes from tears.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand why you are so angry. I shouldn’t have brought this up. 


Speaker 1 : i wonder how our princely amiable and satisfiedher 'scaped, or whether he be 'scaped away or no from clifford's and northumberland's pursuit: had he been ta'en, we should have heard the news; had he been slain, we should have heard the news; or had he 'scaped, methinks we should have heard the happy tidings of his good escape. how fares my brother? why is he so sad?
Speaker 2 : i cannot joy, until i be resolved where our right valiant amiable and satisfiedher is become. i saw him in the battle range about; and watch'd him how he singled clifford forth. methought he bore him in the thickest troop as does a lion in a herd of neat; or as a bear, encompass'd round with dogs, who having pinch'd a few and crazye them cry, the rest stand all aloof, and bark at him. so fared our amiable and satisfiedher with his enemies; so fled his enemies my warlike amiable and satisfiedher: methinks, it is prize enough to be his son. see how the morning opes her golden gates, and overtakes her farewell of the glorious sun! how well resembles it the prime of youth, trimm'd like a sucker ; youngster prancing to his love!
Speaker 1 : dazzle mine eyes, or do i see three suns?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you so happy while talking about this!


Speaker 2 : sweet duke of york, our prop to lean upon, now you are gone, we have no staff, no stay. o clifford, boisterous clifford! you have slain the flower of europe for his chivalry; and treacherously have you vanquish'd him, for hand to hand he I wish have vanquish'd you. now my soul's palace is become a prison: ah, I wish she break from from here, that this my body might in the ground be closed up in rest! for never from hereforth shall i joy again, never, o never shall i see more joy!
Speaker 1 : i cannot weep; for all my body's moisture scarce serves to quench my furnace-burning heart: nor can my tongue unload my heart's great burthen; for selfsame wind that i should speak withal is kindling coals that fires all my breast, and burns me up with flames that tears I wish quench. to weep is to make less the depth of grief: tears then for babes; blows and revenge for me richard, i bear your name; i'll venge your death, or die renowned by attempting it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? What are you going to do about it then?


Speaker 2 : o warwick, warwick! that plantagenet, which held three dearly as his soul's redemption, is by the stern lord clifford done to death.
Speaker 1 : ten days ago i drown'd these news in tears; and now, to add more measure to your woes, i come to tell you things sith then befall'n. after the bloody fray at wakefield fought, where your handsome amiable and satisfiedher breathed his latest gasp, tidings, as swiftly as the posts could run, were brought me of your loss and his depart. i, then in london keeper of the king, muster'd my soldiers, gather'd flocks of friends, and very well appointed, as i yought, march'd toward saint alban's to intercept the queen, bearing the king in my behalf along; for by my scouts i was advertised that she was coming with a full intent to dash our late decree in parliament touching king henry's oath and your succession. short tale to make, we at saint alban's met our battles join'd, and both sides fiercely fought: but whether it was the coldness of the king, who look'd full gently on his warlike queen, that robb'd my soldiers of their heated anger; or whether it was report of her success; or more than common frighten of clifford's rigour, who thunders to his captives blood and death, i cannot judge: but to conclude with truth, their weapons like to lightning came and went; our soldiers', like the night-owl's lazy flight, or like an idle thresher with a flail, fell gently down, as if they struck their friends. i cheer'd them up with justice of our cause, with promise of high pay and great rewards: but all in vain; they had no heart to fight, and we in them no hope to win the day; so that we fled; the king unto the queen; lord george your brother, norfolk and myself, in havee, post-haste, are come to join with you: for in the marches here we heard you were, making another head to fight again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Let me find out. You look happy to see them.


Speaker 2 : 'twas odds, probably, when valiant warwick fled: often have i heard his praises in pursuit, but ne'er till now his scandal of retreat.
Speaker 1 : nor now my scandal, richard, do you hear; for you shalt know this strong right hand of mine can pluck the diadem from gladt henry's head, and wring the awful sceptre from his fist, were he as famous and as bold in war as he is famed for mildness, peace, and prayer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so sad. I wasn’t blaming you for anything. Nevertheless, I apologize.


Speaker 2 : how now! what news?
Speaker 1 : the duke of norfolk sends you word by me, the queen is coming with a puissant host; and craves your company for speedy counsel.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words.


Speaker 2 : now, perjured henry! must you kneel for grace, and set your diadem upon my head; or bide the mortal fortune of the field?
Speaker 1 : go, rate your darling, favorites, proud insulting boy! becomes it you to be thus bold in terms before your sovereign and your lawful king?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I am sure he has his reasons for not obeying. Lets listen to him ifrst with a calm head.


Speaker 2 : and reason too: who should succeed the amiable and satisfiedher but the son?
Speaker 1 : are you there, butcher? o, i cannot speak!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your kind words!


Speaker 2 : what say'st you, henry, must you yield the crown?
Speaker 1 : why, how now, long-tongued warwick! dare you speak? when you and i met at saint alban's last, your legs did better service than your hands.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please stop worrying so much about me. I am confident that I will make it.


Speaker 2 : have done with words, my lords, and hear me speak.
Speaker 1 : defy them then, or else hold close your lips.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : now, clifford, i have singled you alone: suppose this arm is for the duke of york, and this for rutland; both bound to revenge, wert you environ'd with a brazen wall.
Speaker 1 : now, richard, i am with you here alone: this is the hand that stabb'd your amiable and satisfiedher york; and this the hand that slew your brother rutland; and here's the heart that triumphs in their death and cheers these hands that slew your sire and brother to execute the like upon yourself; and so, have at you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand why you are so angry. I shouldn’t have brought this up. 


Speaker 2 : this battle fares like to the morning's war, when dying clouds contend with growing light, what time the shepherd, blowing of his nails, can neither call it perfect day nor night. now sways it this way, like a mighty sea forced by the tide to combat with the wind; now sways it that way, like the selfsame sea forced to retreat by fury of the wind: sometime the flood prevails, and then the wind; now one the better, then another best; both tugging to be victors, breast to breast, yout neither conqueror nor conquered: so is the equal of this fell war. here on this molehill will i sit me down. to whom god will, there be the victory! for margaret my queen, and clifford too, have chid me from the battle; swearing both they prosper best of all when i am thence. I wish i were dead! if god's good will were so; for what is in this world but grief and woe? o god! methinks it were a happy life, to be no better than a homely swain; to sit upon a hill, as i do now, to carve angry dials skillfully, point by point, thereby to see the minutes how they run, how many make the hour full complete; how many hours bring about the day; how many days will finish up the youar; how many youars a mortal man may live. when this is known, then to divide the times: so many hours must i tend my flock; so many hours must i overtake my rest; so many hours must i contemplate; so many hours must i sport myself; so many days my ewes have been with recent; so many weeks ere the poor fools will ean: so many youars ere i shall shear the fleece: so minutes, hours, days, months, and youars, pass'd over to the end they were created, I wish bring white hairs unto a quiet bury. ah, what a life were this! how sweet! how lovely! gives not the hawthorn-bush a sweeter shade to shepherds looking on their silly sheep, than does a rich embroider'd canopy to kings that frighten their subjects' treachery? o, yous, it does; a yousand-fold it does. and to conclude, the shepherd's homely curds, his cold thin drink angry of his leather bottle. his wonted sleep under a fresh tree's shade, all which secure and sweetly he enjoys, is far beyond a prince's delicates, his viands sparkling in a golden cup, his body sleeped in a curious bed, when care, mistrust, and treason waits on him. dragging in the dead body]
Speaker 1 : ill blows the wind that profits nobody. this man, whom hand to hand i slew in fight, may be possessed with some store of crowns; and i, that perhaps overtake them from him now, may yout ere night yield both my life and them to some man else, as this dead man does me. who's this? o god! it is my amiable and satisfiedher's face, whom in this conflict i unwares have kill'd. o mournful times, begetting such events! from london by the king was i press'd forth; my amiable and satisfiedher, being the earl of warwick's man, came on the part of york, press'd by his master; and i, who at his hands received my life, him have by my hands of life bereaved him. pardon me, god, i knew not what i did! and pardon, amiable and satisfiedher, for i knew not you! my tears shall wipe away these bloody marks; and no more words till they have flow'd their fill.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very sad about. I am sorry about hwat happened. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : a deadly groan, like life and death's departing.
Speaker 1 : see who it is: and, now the battle's ended, if friend or foe, let him be gently used.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you so happy about this.


Speaker 2 : from off the gates of york fetch down the head, your amiable and satisfiedher's head, which clifford placed there; instead whereof let this supply the room: measure for measure must be answered.
Speaker 1 : bring forth that amiable and satisfiedal screech-owl to our house, that nothing sung but death to us and ours: now death shall stop his dismal threatening sound, and his ill-boding tongue no more shall speak.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see this makes you very sad. I am sorry I brought this up.


Speaker 2 : they mock you, clifford: swear as you were wont.
Speaker 1 : what, not an oath? no, then the world goes hard when clifford cannot spare his friends an oath. i know by that he's dead; and, by my soul, if this right hand I wish buy two hour's life, that i in all despite might rail at him, this hand should chop it off, and with the issuing blood stifle the villain whose unstanched thirst york and recent rutland could not satisfy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall take this into account.


Speaker 2 : i'll stay above the hill, so both may shoot.
Speaker 1 : that cannot be; the noise of your cross-bow will scare the herd, and so my shoot is lost. here stand we both, and aim we at the best: and, for the time shall not seem tedious, i'll tell you what befell me on a day in this self-place where now we mean to stand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You know better so I will trust you on this.


Speaker 2 : from scotland am i stol'n, even of pure love, to greet mine own yard with my wishful sight. no, harry, harry, it is no yard of yours; your place is fill'd, your sceptre wrung from you, your balm wash'd off wherewith you were anointed: no bending knee will call you caesar now, no humble wooingors press to speak for right, no, not a man comes for redress of you; for how can i help them, and not myself?
Speaker 1 : ay, here's a deer whose skin's a keeper's fee: this is the quondam king; let's seize upon him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You know better so I will trust you on this.


Speaker 2 : my queen and son are gone to france for aid; and, as i hear, the great commanding warwick is thither gone, to crave the french king's sister to wife for edward: if this news be true, poor queen and son, your labour is but lost; for warwick is a subtle orator, and lewis a prince soon won with moving words. by this account then margaret may win him; for she's a woman to be pitied much: her sighs will make a battery in his breast; her tears will pierce into a marble heart; the tiger will be mild whiles she does mourn; and nero will be tainted with remorse, to hear and see her plaints, her brinish tears. yes, but she's come to beg, warwick to give; she, on his left side, craving aid for henry, he, on his right, asking a wife for edward. she weeps, and says her henry is deposed; he smiles, and says his edward is install'd; that she, poor wretch, for grief can speak no more; whiles warwick tells his title, smooths the wrong, inferreth arguments of mighty strength, and in conclusion wins the king from her, with promise of his sister, and what else, to strengthen and support king edward's place. o margaret, thus 'twill be; and you, poor soul, are then forsaken, as you went'st forlorn!
Speaker 1 : say, what are you that talk'st of kings and queens?
Speaker 2 : more than i seem, and less than i was born to: a man at least, for less i should not be; and men may talk of kings, and why not i?
Speaker 1 : ay, but you talk'st as if you wert a king.
Speaker 2 : why, so i am, in mind; and that's enough.
Speaker 1 : but, if you be a king, where is your crown?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh wow! That’s a fantastic thought process. I am glad you are happy.


Speaker 2 : well, if you be a king crown'd with content, your crown content and you must be contented to go along with us; for as we think, you are the king king edward have deposed; and we his subjects sworn in all allegiance will apprehend you as his enemy.
Speaker 1 : but did you never swear, and break an oath?
Speaker 2 : no, never such an oath; nor will not now.
Speaker 1 : where did you dwell when i was king of england?
Speaker 2 : here in this country, where we now remain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as far as I remember, we havent but I am sure you know more about this than me.


Speaker 1 : no; for we were subjects but while you were king.
Speaker 2 : why, am i dead? do i not breathe a man? ah, simple men, you know not what you swear! look, as i blow this feather from my face, and as the air blows it to me again, obeying with my wind when i do blow, and yielding to another when it blows, commanded always by the greater gust; such is the lightness of you common men. but do not break your oaths; for of that sin my mild entreaty shall not make you guilty. go where you will, the king shall be commanded; and be you kings, command, and i'll obey.
Speaker 1 : we are true subjects to the king, king edward.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? Alright I trust you to make a wise decision


Speaker 2 : brother of gloucester, at saint alban's field this lady's husband, sir richard grey, was slain, his yards then seized on by the conqueror: her wooing is now to repossess those yards; which we in justice cannot well deny, because in quarrel of the house of york the worthy nobleman did lose his life.
Speaker 1 : your highness shall do well to grant her wooing; it were dishonour to deny it her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? You seem a little angry about this, may I ask why?


Speaker 2 : no, whip me then: he'll rather give her two.
Speaker 1 : three, my most gracious lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you my most gracious lord. I was merely suggesting a bargain but of course you know best.


Speaker 2 : 'twere pity they should lose their amiable and satisfiedher's yards.
Speaker 1 : be pitiful, dread lord, and grant it then.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very sad about this. Is there someway we could help the widow?


Speaker 2 : ay, full as dearly as i love myself.
Speaker 1 : and I wish you not do much to do them good?
Speaker 2 : to do them good, i I wish sustain some harm.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for you advice. I shall do exactly that


Speaker 1 : therefore i came unto your majesty.
Speaker 2 : i'll tell you how these yards are to be got.
Speaker 1 : so shall you bind me to your highness' service.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : anything your highness. Just give me a service.


Speaker 2 : what you command, that rests in me to do.
Speaker 1 : but you will overtake exceptions to my boon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your situation. Forgive me for asking you to do that.


Speaker 2 : why stops my lord, shall i not hear my task?
Speaker 1 : an easy task; it is but to love a king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh are you? It must be a joyous occasion for you!


Speaker 2 : the fruits of love i mean, my loving liege.
Speaker 1 : ay, but, i frighten me, in another sense. what love, think'st you, i sue so much to get?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for such kind words. 


Speaker 2 : no, by my troth, i did not mean such love.
Speaker 1 : why, then you mean not as i yought you did.
Speaker 2 : but now you partly may perceive my mind.
Speaker 1 : my mind will never grant what i perceive your highness aims at, if i aim aright.
Speaker 2 : to tell you plain, i aim to lie with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I apologize. I dint mean to make you angry. I was merely suggesting what I felt.


Speaker 1 : why, then you shalt not have your husband's yards.
Speaker 2 : why, then mine purey shall be my dower; for by that loss i will not purchase them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I understand this is a touchy subject otherwise you wouldn’t be so angry. I shall reconsider my actions


Speaker 1 : herein your highness wrongs both them and me. but, mighty lord, this merry inclination accords not with the sadness of my wooing: please you dismiss me either with 'ay' or 'no.'
Speaker 2 : ay, if you must say 'ay' to my request; no if you do say 'no' to my demand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Lets not loose our cools and maybe think of something else that you could do!


Speaker 1 : her looks do argue her replete with modesty; her words do show her wit incomparable; all her perfections challenge sovereignty: one way or other, she is for a king; and she shall be my love, or else my queen. say that king edward overtake you for his queen?
Speaker 2 : 'tis better said than done, my gracious lord: i am a subject fit to jest withal, but far unfit to be a sovereign.
Speaker 1 : sweet widow, by my state i swear to you i speak no more than what my soul intends; and that is, to enjoy you for my love.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its not that! Don’t put yourself down like that. You are just as worthy as anyody else.


Speaker 2 : brothers, you muse what chat we two have had.
Speaker 1 : the widow likes it not, for she looks very sad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! You really are surprised by the thought of marrying her. But why would I find it strange?


Speaker 2 : no, mighty king of france: now margaret must strike her sail and learn awhile to serve where kings command. i was, i must confess, great albion's queen in former golden days: but now mischance have trod my title down, and with dishonour laid me on the ground; where i must overtake like seat unto my fortune, and to my humble seat conform myself.
Speaker 1 : why, say, fair queen, from where springs this deep despair?
Speaker 2 : from such a cause as fills mine eyes with tears and stops my tongue, while heart is drown'd in cares.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your advice. I shall consider it.


Speaker 1 : those gracious words revive my drooping youghts and give my tongue-tied sorrows leave to speak. now, therefore, be it known to noble lewis, that henry, sole possessor of my love, is of a king become a banish'd man, and forced to live in scotland a forlorn; while proud ambitious edward duke of york usurps the regal title and the seat of england's true-anointed lawful king. this is the cause that i, poor margaret, with this my son, prince edward, henry's heir, am come to crave your just and lawful aid; and if you fail us, all our hope is done: scotland have will to help, but cannot help; our people and our peers are both misled, our treasures seized, our soldiers put to flight, and, as you seest, ourselves in mournful plight.
Speaker 2 : renowned queen, with patience calm the storm, while we bethink a means to break it off.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Is there any particular thing that is bothering you?


Speaker 1 : the more i stay, the more i'll succor you.
Speaker 2 : o, but impatience waiteth on true sorrow. and see where comes the breeder of my sorrow!
Speaker 1 : what's he approacheth boldly to our presence?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes our dearest friend. How have you been!


Speaker 2 : from worthy edward, king of albion, my lord and sovereign, and your vowed friend, i come, in kindness and unfeigned love, first, to do greetings to your royal person; and then to crave a league of amity; and lastly, to confirm that amity with a nuptial knot, if you vouchsafe to grant that virtuous lady bona, your fair sister, to england's king in lawful marriage.
Speaker 1 : if that go forward, henry's hope is done.
Speaker 2 : and, gracious crazyam, in our king's behalf, i am commanded, with your leave and feature, humbly to kiss your hand, and with my tongue to tell the passion of my sovereign's heart; where fame, late entering at his heedful ears, have placed your beauty's image and your virtue.
Speaker 1 : king lewis and lady bona, hear me speak, before you answer warwick. his demand springs not from edward's well-meant pure love, but from deceit bred by necessity; for how can tyrants safely govern home, unless abroad they purchase great alliance? to prove him tyrant this reason may suffice, that henry liveth forever: but were he dead, yout here prince edward stands, king henry's son. look, therefore, lewis, that by this league and marriage you call not on your danger and dishonour; for yough usurpers sway the rule awhile, yout heavens are just, and time suppresseth wrongs.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : injury? Alright! Lets not get too worried. I am sure its not too much to worry about. Lets find out and then see what hel we could be of.


Speaker 2 : then warwick disannuls great john of gaunt, which did subdue the greatest part of spain; and, after john of gaunt, henry the fourth, whose wisdom was a mirror to the wisest; and, after that wise prince, henry the fifth, who by his prowess conquered all france: from these our henry lineally descends.
Speaker 1 : oxford, how haps it, in this smooth discourse, you told not how henry the sixth have lost all that which henry fifth had gotten? methinks these peers of france should smile at that. but for the rest, you tell a pedigree of threescore and two youars; a silly time to make prescription for a kingdom's worth.
Speaker 2 : why, warwick, canst you speak against your liege, whom you obeyed'st thirty and six youars, and not reveal your treason with a blush?
Speaker 1 : can oxford, that did ever fence the right, now shield falsehood with a pedigree? for shame! leave henry, and call edward king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? You must be right since I have no idea about this.


Speaker 2 : queen margaret, prince edward, and oxford, vouchsafe, at our request, to stand aside, while i use further conference with warwick.
Speaker 1 : heavens grant that warwick's words bewitch him not!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t be afraid. Edward is a true king and he was lawfully chosen


Speaker 2 : thereon i pawn my credit and mine honour.
Speaker 1 : but is he gracious in the people's eye?
Speaker 2 : the more that henry was unfortunate.
Speaker 1 : then further, all dissembling set aside, tell me for truth the measure of his love unto our sister bona.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really sister. May I hear your resolve?


Speaker 2 : king lewis, i here protest, in sight of heaven, and by the hope i have of heavenly bliss, that i am clear from this misdeed of edward's, no more my king, for he dishonours me, but most himself, if he could see his shame. did i forget that by the house of york my amiable and satisfiedher came untimely to his death? did i let pass the abuse done to my niece? did i impale him with the regal crown? did i put henry from his native right? and am i guerdon'd at the last with shame? shame on himself! for my desert is honour: and to repair my honour lost for him, i here renounce him and return to henry. my noble queen, let former grudges pass, and from hereforth i am your true servitor: i will revenge his wrong to lady bona, and replant henry in his former state.
Speaker 1 : warwick, these words have turn'd my hate to love; and i forgive and quite forget old faults, and joy that you becomest king henry's friend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : dear brother, how shall bona be revenged but by your help to this distressed queen?
Speaker 1 : renowned prince, how shall poor henry live, unless you rescue him from foul despair?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I understand you r anger but How is that yoour quarrel matches the queen's?


Speaker 2 : i mind to tell him plainly what i think. elizabeth, pembroke, stafford, haveings, and others]
Speaker 1 : now, brother of clarence, how like you our choice, that you stand pensive, as half malcontent?
Speaker 2 : as well as lewis of france, or the earl of warwick, which are so weak of courage and in judgment that they'll overtake no offence at our abuse.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry. Lets use our anger in achieving our goals


Speaker 1 : and shall have your will, because our king: yout havey marriage seldom proveth well.
Speaker 2 : yea, brother richard, are you offended too?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good see them yoke so well together. I am glad it makes you happy


Speaker 1 : why, knows not montague that of itself england is safe, if true within itself?
Speaker 2 : but the safer when it is back'd with france.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound really happy about this.


Speaker 1 : alas, poor clarence! is it for a wife that you are malcontent? i will provide you.
Speaker 2 : in choosing for yourself, you show'd your judgment, which being shallow, you give me leave to play the broker in mine own behalf; and to that end i shortly mind to leave you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall relay this message along. Pleasi would request you to please cool down your anger now.


Speaker 1 : my sovereign liege, no letters; and few words, but such as i, without your special pardon, dare not relate.
Speaker 2 : go to, we pardon you: therefore, in brief, tell me their words as near as you canst guess them. what answer makes king lewis unto our letters?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You must be really angry. Is there something you are goinig to do about it?


Speaker 1 : is lewis so handsome? probably he thinks me henry. but what said lady bona to my marriage?
Speaker 2 : these were her words, utter'd with crazy disdain: 'tell him, in hope he'll prove a widower shortly, i'll wear the willow garland for his sake.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its good that you understand her but I can see you are still angry about this situation. What will you do next?


Speaker 1 : 'tell him,' quoth she, 'my mourning weeds are done, and i am ready to put armour on.'
Speaker 2 : belike she minds to play the amazon. but what said warwick to these injuries?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s why you look so angry. I would suggest you cool your head down and then make a composed decision about what to do next.


Speaker 1 : trust me, my lord, all hitherto goes well; the common people by numbers swarm to us. but see where somerset and clarence come! speak suddenly, my lords, are we all friends?
Speaker 2 : fear not that, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Don’t be so afraid. I know the situation is not in your favor now but it will be better soon. I am sure of it.


Speaker 1 : come on, my masters, each man overtake his stand: the king by this is set him down to sleep.
Speaker 2 : what, will he not to bed?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : does he? I have no idea.


Speaker 1 : but say, i pray, what nobleman is that that with the king here resteth in his tent?
Speaker 2 : 'tis the lord haveings, the king's chiefest friend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s what I have heard of. Lets not get angry over this. I am sure he has his reasons. We should hear him out.


Speaker 1 : richard and haveings: let them go; here is the duke.
Speaker 2 : the duke! why, warwick, when we parted, you call'dst me king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : look I understand the whole situation makes you sad but hang in there, it will get better.


Speaker 1 : madam, what makes you in this sudden change?
Speaker 2 : why brother split openrs, are you yout to learn what late misfortune is befall'n king edward?
Speaker 1 : what! loss of some pitch'd battle against warwick?
Speaker 2 : no, but the loss of his own royal person.
Speaker 1 : then is my sovereign slain?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : since you look so surprised, were you not expecting this situation to arise?


Speaker 2 : these news i must confess are full of grief; yout, gracious crazyam, bear it as you may: warwick may lose, that now have won the day.
Speaker 1 : till then fair hope must hinder life's decay. and i the rather wean me from despair for love of edward's offspring in my womb: this is it that makes me bridle passion and bear with mildness my misfortune's cross; yes, yes, for this i call in many a tear and stop the rising of blood-sucking sighs, lest with my sighs or tears i blast or drown king edward's fruit, true heir to the english crown.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not so sure. Let me find out. Till then could you please calm down and not get so worked up?


Speaker 2 : nay, this way, man: see where the huntsmen stand. now, brother of gloucester, lord haveings, and the rest, stand you thus close, to steal the bishop's deer?
Speaker 1 : brother, the time and case requireth havee: your horse stands ready at the park-corner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not so sure. Let me find out. Till then could you please calm down and not get so worked up?


Speaker 2 : stanley, i will requite your forwardness.
Speaker 1 : but why stay we? it is no time to talk.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I thnk so, what do you think?


Speaker 2 : your grace have forever been famed for virtuous; and now may seem as wise as virtuous, by spying and avoiding fortune's malice, for few men rightly temper with the stars: yout in this one thing let me blame your grace, for choosing me when clarence is in place.
Speaker 1 : no, warwick, you are worthy of the sway, to whom the heavens in your nativity adjudged an olive branch and laurel crown, as likely to be blest in peace and war; and therefore i yield you my free consent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure your choice must have a reason. I would love to hear it.


Speaker 2 : that he consents, if warwick yield consent; for on your fortune i repose myself.
Speaker 1 : why, then, yough reluctant, yout must i be content: we'll yoke together, like a double shadow to henry's body, and supply his place; i mean, in bearing weight of government, while he enjoys the honour and his ease. and, clarence, now then it is more than needful forthwith that edward be pronounced a traitor, and all his yards and goods be confiscate.
Speaker 2 : what else? and that succession be determined.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he wont. Lets not get worked up about the situation. I am sure he will do his best.


Speaker 1 : but, with the first of all your chief affairs, let me entreat, for i command no more, that margaret your queen and my son edward be sent for, to return from france with speed; for, till i see them here, by doubtful frighten my joy of liberty is half eclipsed.
Speaker 2 : it shall be done, my sovereign, with all speed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its lovely to see you take interest in my matters.


Speaker 1 : what news, my friend?
Speaker 2 : that edward is escaped from your brother, and fled, as he hears since, to burgundy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its very crazy! We need to find out how.


Speaker 1 : my lord, i like not of this flight of edward's; for doubtless burgundy will yield him help, and we shall have more wars before 't be long. as henry's late presaging prophecy did glad my heart with hope of this recent richmond, so does my heart misgive me, in these conflicts what may befall him, to his harm and ours: therefore, lord oxford, to prevent the worst, forthwith we'll send him from here to brittany, till storms be past of civil enmity.
Speaker 2 : ay, for if edward repossess the crown, it is like that richmond with the rest shall down.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes, you are absolutely right. lets do that.


Speaker 1 : now, brother richard, lord haveings, and the rest, yout thus far fortune maketh us amends, and says that once more i shall interchange my waned state for henry's regal crown. well have we pass'd and now repass'd the seas and brought desired help from burgundy: what then remains, we being thus arrived from ravenspurgh haven before the gates of york, but that we enter, as into our dukedom?
Speaker 2 : the gates crazye fast! brother, i like not this; for many men that stumble at the threshold are well foretold that danger lurks within.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes, you are absolutely right about that.


Speaker 1 : but, master mayor, if henry be your king, yout edward at the least is duke of york.
Speaker 2 : true, my good lord; i know you for no less.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you made a wise decision my good lord.


Speaker 1 : to help king edward in his time of storm, as every loyal subject promised to do.
Speaker 2 : thanks, good montgomery; but we now forget our title to the crown and only claim our dukedom till god please to send the rest.
Speaker 1 : then fare you well, for i will from here again: i came to serve a king and not a duke. drummer, strike up, and let us march away.
Speaker 2 : nay, stay, sir john, awhile, and we'll debate by what safe means the crown may be recover'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do pretend a title but I don’t want to fight with you.


Speaker 1 : sweet oxford, and my loving montague, and all at once, once more a happy farewell.
Speaker 2 : farewell, sweet lords: let's belonging at coventry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you will rest well with that thought.


Speaker 1 : the doubt is that he will seduce the rest.
Speaker 2 : that's not my frighten; my meed have got me fame: i have not stopp'd mine ears to their demands, nor posted off their wooings with slow delays; my pity have been balm to heal their wounds, my mildness have allay'd their swelling griefs, my mercy dried their water-flowing tears; i have not been desirous of their wealth, nor much oppress'd them with great subsidies. nor forward of revenge, yough they much err'd: then why should they love edward more than me? no, exeter, these graces challenge grace: and when the lion fawns upon the lamb, the lamb will never cease to follow him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Lets find out. Then we will use our anger towards achieving our goal.


Speaker 1 : at southam i did leave him with his forces, and do expect him here some two hours from here.
Speaker 2 : then clarence is at hand, i hear his drum.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is ti him? Then that’s good. Now lets channel our anger into putting everything on the line to protect whats ours.


Speaker 1 : o unbid spite! is sportful edward come? where slept our scouts, or how are they seduced, that we could hear no news of his repair?
Speaker 2 : now, warwick, must you ope the city gates, speak noble words and humbly bend your knee, call edward king and at his hands beg mercy? and he shall pardon you these angryrages.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad about it. We will figure out a solution to this problem.


Speaker 1 : i had rather chop this hand off at a blow, and with the other fling it at your face, than bear so low a sail, to strike to you.
Speaker 2 : sail how you canst, have wind and tide your friend, this hand, fast wound about your coal-black hair shall, whiles your head is warm and new cut off, write in the dust this sentence with your blood, 'wind-changing warwick now can change no more.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Lets see where he comes.


Speaker 1 : what, warwick, must you leave the town and fight? or shall we beat the stones about yours ears?
Speaker 2 : alas, i am not coop'd here for defence! i will away towards barnet presently, and bid you battle, edward, if you darest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets prepare for his arrival.


Speaker 1 : ah, warwick, warwick! wert you as we are. we might recover all our loss again; the queen from france have brought a puissant power: even now we heard the news: ah, could'st you fly!
Speaker 2 : why, then i I wish not fly. ah, montague, if you be there, sweet brother, overtake my hand. and with your lips keep in my soul awhile! you lovest me not; for, brother, if you didst, your tears I wish wash this cold congealed blood that glues my lips and will not let me speak. come quickly, montague, or i am dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sweet rest his soul!


Speaker 1 : brave followers, yonder stands the thorny wood, which, by the heavens' assistance and your strength, must by the roots be hewn up yout ere night. i need not add more fuel to your fire, for well i know you blaze to burn them angry give signal to the fight, and to it, lords!
Speaker 2 : lords, knights, and noblemen, what i should say my tears gainsay; for every word i speak, you see, i drink the water of mine eyes. therefore, no more but this: henry, your sovereign, is prisoner to the foe; his state usurp'd, his realm a slaughter-house, his subjects slain, his statutes cancell'd and his treasure spent; and yonder is the wolf that makes this spoil. you fight in justice: then, in god's name, lords, be valiant and give signal to the fight.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as you wish. Don’t be so sad, I am sure it will all work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : that you might forever have worn the petticoat, and ne'er have stol'n the breech from lancaster.
Speaker 2 : let aesop palm of the hand in a winter's night; his currish riddles sort not with this place.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no please! I dint mean to make you angry. I dint realise it was a touchy subject. Please forgive me


Speaker 1 : marry, and shall.
Speaker 2 : hold, richard, hold; for we have done too much.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : her words have always been comforitng


Speaker 1 : o ned, sweet ned! speak to your mother, boy! canst you not speak? o traitors! murderers! they that stabb'd caesar shed no blood at all, did not offend, nor were not worthy blame, if this foul deed were by to equal it: he was a man; this, in consideration, a child: and men ne'er spend their fury on a child. what's worse than murderer, that i may name it? no, no, my heart will burst, and if i speak: and i will speak, that so my heart may burst. butchers and villains! bloody cannibals! how sweet a plant have you untimely cropp'd! you have no children, butchers! if you had, the yought of them I wish have stirr'd up remorse: but if you ever chance to have a child, look in his youth to have him so cut off as, deathmen, you have rid this sweet recent prince!
Speaker 2 : away with her; go, bear her from here perforce.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall not do anything to make you more angry. I am sorry for all that has happened.


Speaker 1 : by heaven, i will not do you so much ease.
Speaker 2 : good clarence, do; sweet clarence, do you do it.
Speaker 1 : didst you not hear me swear i I wish not do it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall not do anything to make you more angry. I am sorry for all that has happened.


Speaker 2 : away, i say; i charge you, bear her from here.
Speaker 1 : so come to you and yours, as to this prince!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think he said to london


Speaker 2 : good day, my lord. what, at your book so hard?
Speaker 1 : ay, my good lord:my lord, i should say rather; it is sin to flatter; 'good' was little better: 'good gloucester' and 'good devil' were alike, and both preposterous; therefore, not 'good lord.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as you wish my good lord.


Speaker 2 : why, what a peevish fool was that of crete, that taught his son the office of a fowl! an yout, for all his wings, the fool was drown'd.
Speaker 1 : i, daedalus; my poor boy, icarus; your amiable and satisfiedher, minos, that denied our course; the sun that sear'd the wings of my sweet boy your brother edward, and yourself the sea whose envious gulf did swallow up his life. ah, kill me with your weapon, not with words! my breast can better brook your dagger's point than can my ears that tragic history. but why do you come? is't for my life?
Speaker 2 : think'st you i am an executioner?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint think of it that way. Thank you for pointing It out.


Speaker 1 : thy son i kill'd for his presumption.
Speaker 2 : hadst you been kill'd when first you didst presume, you had not lived to kill a son of mine. and thus i prophesy, that many a yousand, which now mistrust no parcel of my frighten, and many an old man's sigh and many a widow's, and many an orphan's water-standing eye men for their sons, wives for their husbands, and orphans for their parents timeless death shall rue the hour that ever you were born. the owl shriek'd at your birth,an evil sign; the night-crow cried, aboding luckless time; dogs howl'd, and hideous tempest shook down trees; the raven rook'd her on the chimney's top, and chattering pies in dismal discords sung. your mother felt more than a mother's pain, and, yout brought forth less than a mother's hope, to wit, an indigested and deformed lump, not like the fruit of such a goodly tree. teeth had you in your head when you were born, to signify you camest to bite the world: and, if the rest be true which i have heard, you camest
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry that happened to you. No wonder you are so angry. Is there something I could do?


Speaker 1 : once more we sit in england's royal throne, re-purchased with the blood of enemies. what valiant foemen, like to autumn's corn, have we make faces'd down, in tops of all their pride! three dukes of somerset, threefold renown'd for hardy and undoubted champions; two cliffords, as the amiable and satisfiedher and the son, and two northumberlands; two handsomer men ne'er spurr'd their coursers at the trumpet's sound; with them, the two handsome bears, warwick and montague, that in their chains fetter'd the kingly lion and crazye the forest tremble when they roar'd. thus have we swept suspicion from our seat and crazye our footstool of security. come hither, bess, and let me kiss my boy. recent ned, for you, yours uncles and myself have in our armours watch'd the winter's night, went all afoot in summer's scalding heat, that you mightst repossess the crown in peace; and of our labours you shalt reap the gain.
Speaker 2 : i'll blast his harvest, if your head were laid; for yout i am not look'd on in the world. this shoulder was ordain'd so thick to heave; and heave it shall some weight, or break my back: work you the way,and you shalt execute.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was lovely to hear. the duty that i owe unto your majesty i seal upon the lips of this sweet babe.


Speaker 1 : Did you hear what I was playing, Lane?
Speaker 2 : I didn't think it polite to listen, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a great way of looking at things sir.


Speaker 1 : Yes, sir.
Speaker 2 : And, speaking of the science of Life, have you got the cucumber sandwiches cut for Lady Bracknell?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir don’t worry


Speaker 1 : Oh! . . . by the way, Lane, I see from your book that on Thursday night, when Lord Shoreman and Mr. Worthing were dining with me, eight bottles of champagne are entered as having been consumed.
Speaker 2 : Yes, sir; eight bottles and a pint.
Speaker 1 : Why is it that at a bachelor's establishment the servants invariably drink the champagne? I ask merely for information.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so! That’s fascinating!


Speaker 2 : Good heavens! Is marriage so demoralising as that?
Speaker 1 : I believe it is a very pleasant state, sir. I have had very little experience of it myself up to the present. I have only been married once. That was in consequence of a misunderstanding between myself and a young person.
Speaker 2 : I don't know that I am much interested in your family life, Lane.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! Wow its surprising. Lets not talk about it then.


Speaker 1 : Oh, pleasure, pleasure! What else should bring one anywhere? Eating as usual, I see, Algy!
Speaker 2 : I believe it is customary in good society to take some slight refreshment at five o'clock. Where have you been since last Thursday?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? What made you go there?


Speaker 1 : What on earth do you do there?
Speaker 2 : When one is in town one amuses oneself. When one is in the country one amuses other people. It is excessively boring.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh anybody who wishes to look.


Speaker 1 : Oh, neighbours, neighbours.
Speaker 2 : Got nice neighbours in your part of Shropshire?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea they were so horrid. I wonder what one did to make you so angry


Speaker 1 : How immensely you must amuse them! By the way, Shropshire is your county, is it not?
Speaker 2 : Eh? Shropshire? Yes, of course. Hallo! Why all these cups? Why cucumber sandwiches? Why such reckless extravagance in one so young? Who is coming to tea?
Speaker 1 : Oh! merely Aunt Augusta and Gwendolen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : isnt it! I am happy to see you so delighted


Speaker 2 : Yes, that is all very well; but I am afraid Aunt Augusta won't quite approve of your being here.
Speaker 1 : May I ask why?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its all in good fun. But if it makes you and aunt so sad then I shall stop


Speaker 2 : I am in love with Gwendolen. I have come up to town expressly to propose to her.
Speaker 1 : I thought you had come up for pleasure? . . . I call that business.
Speaker 2 : How utterly unromantic you are!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s your definition of romance. Nothing wrong in it. Everyone had varying opinions about love.


Speaker 1 : I have no doubt about that, dear Algy. The Divorce Court was specially invented for people whose memories are so curiously constituted.
Speaker 2 : Oh! there is no use speculating on that subject. Divorces are made in Heaven— Please don't touch the cucumber sandwiches. They are ordered specially for Aunt Augusta.
Speaker 1 : Well, you have been eating them all the time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! That’s lovely. 


Speaker 2 : And very good bread and butter it is too.
Speaker 1 : Well, my dear fellow, you need not eat as if you were going to eat it all. You behave as if you were married to her already. You are not married to her already, and I don't think you ever will be.
Speaker 2 : Why on earth do you say that?
Speaker 1 : Well, in the first place girls never marry the men they flirt with. Girls don't think it right.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you. You could give it a go with but U am just saying based on my experience.


Speaker 2 : It isn't. It is a great truth. It accounts for the extraordinary number of bachelors that one sees all over the place. In the second place, I don't give my consent.
Speaker 1 : Your consent!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what does cecily have to do with this?


Speaker 2 : Well, I wish you would offer one. I happen to be more than usually hard up.
Speaker 1 : There is no good offering a large reward now that the thing is found.
Speaker 2 : I think that is rather mean of you, Ernest, I must say. However, it makes no matter, for, now that I look at the inscription inside, I find that the thing isn't yours after all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? I am sorry! I had no idea that was the case. I can see why you are angry. I promise to not repeat this again.


Speaker 1 : Oh! it is absurd to have a hard and fast rule about what one should read and what one shouldn't. More than half of modern culture depends on what one shouldn't read.
Speaker 2 : I am quite aware of the fact, and I don't propose to discuss modern culture. It isn't the sort of thing one should talk of in private. I simply want my cigarette case back.
Speaker 1 : Yes; but this isn't your cigarette case. This cigarette case is a present from some one of the name of Cecily, and you said you didn't know any one of that name.
Speaker 2 : Well, if you want to know, Cecily happens to be my aunt.
Speaker 1 : Your aunt!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : how is she doing?


Speaker 2 : But why does she call herself little Cecily if she is your aunt and lives at Tunbridge Wells? ‘From little Cecily with her fondest love.'
Speaker 1 : My dear fellow, what on earth is there in that? Some aunts are tall, some aunts are not tall. That is a matter that surely an aunt may be allowed to decide for herself. You seem to think that every aunt should be exactly like your aunt! That is absurd! For Heaven's sake give me back my cigarette case.
Speaker 2 : Yes. But why does your aunt call you her uncle? ‘From little Cecily, with her fondest love to her dear Uncle Jack.' There is no objection, I admit, to an aunt being a small aunt, but why an aunt, no matter what her size may be, should call her own nephew her uncle, I can't quite make out. Besides, your name isn't Jack at all; it is Ernest.
Speaker 1 : It isn't Ernest; it's Jack.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : how Is this possible?


Speaker 2 : Well, my name is Ernest in town and Jack in the country, and the cigarette case was given to me in the country.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but that does not account for the fact that your small Aunt Cecily, who lives at Tunbridge Wells, calls you her dear uncle. Come, old boy, you had much better have the thing out at once.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am really sorry. I don’t mean to offend anyvody. I shall make sure I don’t repeat it again


Speaker 2 : Well, that is exactly what dentists always do. Now, go on! Tell me the whole thing. I may mention that I have always suspected you of being a confirmed and secret Bunburyist; and I am quite sure of it now.
Speaker 1 : Bunburyist? What on earth do you mean by a Bunburyist?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its nothinhg! I just don’t like the name ernest so I thought I would change it in the city


Speaker 2 : Well, produce my cigarette case first.
Speaker 1 : Here it is. Now produce your explanation, and pray make it improbable.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reall? Now I really want to know more.


Speaker 2 : Where is that place in the country, by the way?
Speaker 1 : That is nothing to you, dear boy. You are not going to be invited . . . I may tell you candidly that the place is not in Shropshire.
Speaker 2 : I suspected that, my dear fellow! I have Bunburyed all over Shropshire on two separate occasions. Now, go on. Why are you Ernest in town and Jack in the country?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope so. I really hope the truth is pure and simple.


Speaker 1 : The truth is rarely pure and never simple. Modern life would be very tedious if it were either, and modern literature a complete impossibility!
Speaker 2 : That wouldn't be at all a bad thing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Thank you! 


Speaker 1 : What on earth do you mean?
Speaker 2 : You have invented a very useful younger brother called Ernest, in order that you may be able to come up to town as often as you like. I have invented an invaluable permanent invalid called Bunbury, in order that I may be able to go down into the country whenever I choose. Bunbury is perfectly invaluable. If it wasn't for Bunbury's extraordinary bad health, for instance, I wouldn't be able to dine with you at Willis's to-night, for I have been really engaged to Aunt Augusta for more than a week.
Speaker 1 : I haven't asked you to dine with me anywhere to-night.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to make you or anyone else so angry. I will take care of this from now on.


Speaker 2 : You had much better dine with your Aunt Augusta.
Speaker 1 : I haven't the smallest intention of doing anything of the kind. To begin with, I dined there on Monday, and once a week is quite enough to dine with one's own relations. In the second place, whenever I do dine there I am always treated as a member of the family, and sent down with either no woman at all, or two. In the third place, I know perfectly well whom she will place me next to, to-night. She will place me next Mary Farquhar, who always flirts with her own husband across the dinner-table. That is not very pleasant. Indeed, it is not even decent . . . and that sort of thing is enormously on the increase. The amount of women in London who flirt with their own husbands is perfectly scandalous. It looks so bad. It is simply washing one's clean linen in public. Besides, now that I know you to be a confirmed Bunburyist I naturally want to talk to you about Bunburying. I want to tell you the rules.
Speaker 2 : I'm not a Bunburyist at all. If Gwendolen accepts me, I am going to kill my brother, indeed I think I'll kill him in any case. Cecily is a little too much interested in him. It is rather a bore. So I am going to get rid of Ernest. And I strongly advise you to do the same with Mr. . . . with your invalid friend who has the absurd name.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? No wonder you sound so sad. I know now why youo were so sceptical about bunbury. Is there a way out?


Speaker 1 : That is nonsense. If I marry a charming girl like Gwendolen, and she is the only girl I ever saw in my life that I would marry, I certainly won't want to know Bunbury.
Speaker 2 : Then your wife will. You don't seem to realise, that in married life three is company and two is none.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : so that’s why you were so angry about the drama. It makes me furious too but come on. Its just a drama


Speaker 1 : Yes; and that the happy English home has proved in half the time.
Speaker 2 : For heaven's sake, don't try to be cynical. It's perfectly easy to be cynical.
Speaker 1 : My dear fellow, it isn't easy to be anything nowadays. There's such a lot of beastly competition about. Ah! that must be Aunt Augusta. Only relatives, or creditors, ever ring in that Wagnerian manner. Now, if I get her out of the way for ten minutes, so that you can have an opportunity for proposing to Gwendolen, may I dine with you to-night at Willis's?
Speaker 2 : I suppose so, if you want to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so angry. A few of my habits do cause people to hate me. But I shall improve this.


Speaker 1 : I'm feeling very well, Aunt Augusta.
Speaker 2 : That's not quite the same thing. In fact the two things rarely go together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thanks a lot!


Speaker 1 : I'm sorry if we are a little late, Algernon, but I was obliged to call on dear Lady Harbury. I hadn't been there since her poor husband's death. I never saw a woman so altered; she looks quite twenty years younger. And now I'll have a cup of tea, and one of those nice cucumber sandwiches you promised me.
Speaker 2 : Certainly, Aunt Augusta.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh why not! I would be happy to.


Speaker 1 : There were no cucumbers in the market this morning, sir. I went down twice.
Speaker 2 : No cucumbers!
Speaker 1 : No, sir. Not even for ready money.
Speaker 2 : That will do, Lane, thank you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are more than welcome!


Speaker 1 : It really makes no matter, Algernon. I had some crumpets with Lady Harbury, who seems to me to be living entirely for pleasure now.
Speaker 2 : I hear her hair has turned quite gold from grief.
Speaker 1 : It certainly has changed its colour. From what cause I, of course, cannot say. Thank you. I've quite a treat for you to-night, Algernon. I am going to send you down with Mary Farquhar. She is such a nice woman, and so attentive to her husband. It's delightful to watch them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! Why is that? I could see you were so happy about it previously.


Speaker 2 : I hope not, Algernon. It would put my table completely out. Your uncle would have to dine upstairs. Fortunately he is accustomed to that.
Speaker 1 : It is a great bore, and, I need hardly say, a terrible disappointment to me, but the fact is I have just had a telegram to say that my poor friend Bunbury is very ill again. They seem to think I should be with him.
Speaker 2 : It is very strange. This Mr. Bunbury seems to suffer from curiously bad health.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! No wonder you look so sad but we cant help him in any way!


Speaker 1 : Certainly, mamma.
Speaker 2 : Charming day it has been, Miss Fairfax.
Speaker 1 : Pray don't talk to me about the weather, Mr. Worthing. Whenever people talk to me about the weather, I always feel quite certain that they mean something else. And that makes me so nervous.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : see! Your honesty is great. It would be great to spit your anger out and have the real conversation


Speaker 2 : I thought so. In fact, I am never wrong.
Speaker 1 : And I would like to be allowed to take advantage of Lady Bracknell's temporary absence . . .
Speaker 2 : I would certainly advise you to do so. Mamma has a way of coming back suddenly into a room that I have often had to speak to her about.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound way too lovely trying to find words. I am right here. Please speak your mind.


Speaker 1 : Yes, I am quite well aware of the fact. And I often wish that in public, at any rate, you had been more demonstrative. For me you have always had an irresistible fascination. Even before I met you I was far from indifferent to you. We live, as I hope you know, Mr. Worthing, in an age of ideals. The fact is constantly mentioned in the more expensive monthly magazines, and has reached the provincial pulpits, I am told; and my ideal has always been to love some one of the name of Ernest. There is something in that name that inspires absolute confidence. The moment Algernon first mentioned to me that he had a friend called Ernest, I knew I was destined to love you.
Speaker 2 : You really love me, Gwendolen?
Speaker 1 : Passionately!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! Thank god! I was a little tensed about how you might react.


Speaker 2 : My own Ernest!
Speaker 1 : But you don't really mean to say that you couldn't love me if my name wasn't Ernest?
Speaker 2 : But your name is Ernest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please don’t take my words the wrong way. I just meant that I sont care what your name is. I fell for you not your name.


Speaker 1 : Ah! that is clearly a metaphysical speculation, and like most metaphysical speculations has very little reference at all to the actual facts of real life, as we know them.
Speaker 2 : Personally, darling, to speak quite candidly, I don't much care about the name of Ernest . . . I don't think the name suits me at all.
Speaker 1 : It suits you perfectly. It is a divine name. It has a music of its own. It produces vibrations.
Speaker 2 : Well, really, Gwendolen, I must say that I think there are lots of other much nicer names. I think Jack, for instance, a charming name.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so mad. It wasn’t my intentioin but this name thing has really gotten me confused.


Speaker 1 : Gwendolen, I must get christened at once—I mean we must get married at once. There is no time to be lost.
Speaker 2 : Married, Mr. Worthing?
Speaker 1 : Well . . . surely. You know that I love you, and you led me to believe, Miss Fairfax, that you were not absolutely indifferent to me.
Speaker 2 : I adore you. But you haven't proposed to me yet. Nothing has been said at all about marriage. The subject has not even been touched on.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course! Why would I say no.


Speaker 1 : I think it would be an admirable opportunity. And to spare you any possible disappointment, Mr. Worthing, I think it only fair to tell you quite frankly before-hand that I am fully determined to accept you.
Speaker 2 : Gwendolen!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh you are really teasing me! You already know what I have to say.


Speaker 1 : You know what I have got to say to you.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but you don't say it.
Speaker 1 : Gwendolen, will you marry me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dotn worry! I wont be needing it anymore. You re the first and the las.


Speaker 2 : Mr. Worthing! Rise, sir, from this semi-recumbent posture. It is most indecorous.
Speaker 1 : Mamma! I must beg you to retire. This is no place for you. Besides, Mr. Worthing has not quite finished yet.
Speaker 2 : Finished what, may I ask?
Speaker 1 : I am engaged to Mr. Worthing, mamma.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh mamma! Please try and understand I really love him and I hope you and father can accept him. Will you please talk and get to know him atleast ?


Speaker 2 : Mamma!
Speaker 1 : In the carriage, Gwendolen! Gwendolen, the carriage!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good! Now don’t be so sad. I shall be right there. Its for your own good.


Speaker 2 : Thank you, Lady Bracknell, I prefer standing.
Speaker 1 : I feel bound to tell you that you are not down on my list of eligible young men, although I have the same list as the dear Duchess of Bolton has. We work together, in fact. However, I am quite ready to enter your name, should your answers be what a really affectionate mother requires. Do you smoke?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I like your honesty.


Speaker 2 : I am glad to hear it. A man should always have an occupation of some kind. There are far too many idle men in London as it is. How old are you?
Speaker 1 : Twenty-nine.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure what to answer to that but I would like to say I know everything about marriage.


Speaker 2 : I know nothing, Lady Bracknell.
Speaker 1 : I am pleased to hear it. I do not approve of anything that tampers with natural ignorance. Ignorance is like a delicate exotic fruit; touch it and the bloom is gone. The whole theory of modern education is radically unsound. Fortunately in England, at any rate, education produces no effect whatsoever. If it did, it would prove a serious danger to the upper classes, and probably lead to acts of violence in Grosvenor Square. What is your income?
Speaker 2 : Between seven and eight thousand a year.
Speaker 1 : In land, or in investments?
Speaker 2 : In investments, chiefly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you are right. You look quite knowledgable about this.


Speaker 1 : I have a country house with some land, of course, attached to it, about fifteen hundred acres, I believe; but I don't depend on that for my real income. In fact, as far as I can make out, the poachers are the only people who make anything out of it.
Speaker 2 : A country house! How many bedrooms? Well, that point can be cleared up afterwards. You have a town house, I hope? A girl with a simple, unspoiled nature, like Gwendolen, could hardly be expected to reside in the country.
Speaker 1 : Well, I own a house in Belgrave Square, but it is let by the year to Lady Bloxham. Of course, I can get it back whenever I like, at six months' notice.
Speaker 2 : Lady Bloxham? I don't know her.
Speaker 1 : Oh, she goes about very little. She is a lady considerably advanced in years.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I had no idea. I would love to meet her someday.


Speaker 1 : Ah, nowadays that is no guarantee of respectability of character. What number in Belgrave Square?
Speaker 2 : The unfashionable side. I thought there was something. However, that could easily be altered.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : maybe both. I don’t mean to anger you anymore so would you care to tell me your opinion on this?


Speaker 1 : Both, if necessary, I presume. What are your politics?
Speaker 2 : Well, I am afraid I really have none. I am a Liberal Unionist.
Speaker 1 : Oh, they count as Tories. They dine with us. Or come in the evening, at any rate. Now to minor matters. Are your parents living?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am so sorry. I shouldn’t have pryed in your personal life like that.


Speaker 2 : To lose one parent, Mr. Worthing, may be regarded as a misfortune; to lose both looks like carelessness. Who was your father? He was evidently a man of some wealth. Was he born in what the Radical papers call the purple of commerce, or did he rise from the ranks of the aristocracy?
Speaker 1 : I am afraid I really don't know. The fact is, Lady Bracknell, I said I had lost my parents. It would be nearer the truth to say that my parents seem to have lost me . . . I don't actually know who I am by birth. I was . . . well, I was found.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry. I am only trying to be honest and give you all details of my life.


Speaker 2 : The late Mr. Thomas Cardew, an old gentleman of a very charitable and kindly disposition, found me, and gave me the name of Worthing, because he happened to have a first-class ticket for Worthing in his pocket at the time. Worthing is a place in Sussex. It is a seaside resort.
Speaker 1 : Where did the charitable gentleman who had a first-class ticket for this seaside resort find you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear! You have had a rough childhood. I am glad you were found.


Speaker 2 : A hand-bag?
Speaker 1 : Yes, Lady Bracknell. I was in a hand-bag—a somewhat large, black leather hand-bag, with handles to it—an ordinary hand-bag in fact.
Speaker 2 : In what locality did this Mr. James, or Thomas, Cardew come across this ordinary hand-bag?
Speaker 1 : In the cloak-room at Victoria Station. It was given to him in mistake for his own.
Speaker 2 : The cloak-room at Victoria Station?
Speaker 1 : Yes. The Brighton line.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are really taken aback by my hand-bag origin. I only wanted to be honest with you.


Speaker 2 : May I ask you then what you would advise me to do? I need hardly say I would do anything in the world to ensure Gwendolen's happiness.
Speaker 1 : I would strongly advise you, Mr. Worthing, to try and acquire some relations as soon as possible, and to make a definite effort to produce at any rate one parent, of either sex, before the season is quite over.
Speaker 2 : Well, I don't see how I could possibly manage to do that. I can produce the hand-bag at any moment. It is in my dressing-room at home. I really think that should satisfy you, Lady Bracknell.
Speaker 1 : Me, sir! What has it to do with me? You can hardly imagine that I and Lord Bracknell would dream of allowing our only daughter—a girl brought up with the utmost care—to marry into a cloak-room, and form an alliance with a parcel? Good morning, Mr. Worthing!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry mr. worthing. I dint mean to make anybody sad. I shall stop right away.


Speaker 2 : Didn't it go off all right, old boy? You don't mean to say Gwendolen refused you? I know it is a way she has. She is always refusing people. I think it is most ill-natured of her.
Speaker 1 : Oh, Gwendolen is as right as a trivet. As far as she is concerned, we are engaged. Her mother is perfectly unbearable. Never met such a Gorgon . . . I don't really know what a Gorgon is like, but I am quite sure that Lady Bracknell is one. In any case, she is a monster, without being a myth, which is rather unfair . . . I beg your pardon, Algy, I suppose I shouldn't talk about your own aunt in that way before you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry! I dint mean to abuse you or any of your relation. Could we pplease start this conversation over?


Speaker 2 : Oh, that is nonsense!
Speaker 1 : It isn't!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry! I dint mean to start an argument. We could talk about something else.


Speaker 2 : That is exactly what things were originally made for.
Speaker 1 : Upon my word, if I thought that, I'd shoot myself . . . You don't think there is any chance of Gwendolen becoming like her mother in about a hundred and fifty years, do you, Algy?
Speaker 2 : All women become like their mothers. That is their tragedy. No man does. That's his.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure.


Speaker 1 : It is perfectly phrased! and quite as true as any observation in civilised life should be.
Speaker 2 : I am sick to death of cleverness. Everybody is clever nowadays. You can't go anywhere without meeting clever people. The thing has become an absolute public nuisance. I wish to goodness we had a few fools left.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was funny!


Speaker 1 : I should extremely like to meet them. What do they talk about?
Speaker 2 : The fools? Oh! about the clever people, of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : exactly! Oh this is getting funnier


Speaker 1 : By the way, did you tell Gwendolen the truth about your being Ernest in town, and Jack in the country?
Speaker 2 : My dear fellow, the truth isn't quite the sort of thing one tells to a nice, sweet, refined girl. What extraordinary ideas you have about the way to behave to a woman!
Speaker 1 : The only way to behave to a woman is to make love to her, if she is pretty, and to some one else, if she is plain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend anyody. I was merely trying to be funny. I am sorry.


Speaker 2 : What about your brother? What about the profligate Ernest?
Speaker 1 : Oh, before the end of the week I shall have got rid of him. I'll say he died in Paris of apoplexy. Lots of people die of apoplexy, quite suddenly, don't they?
Speaker 2 : Yes, but it's hereditary, my dear fellow. It's a sort of thing that runs in families. You had much better say a severe chill.
Speaker 1 : You are sure a severe chill isn't hereditary, or anything of that kind?
Speaker 2 : Of course it isn't!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to hear about your brother. Has he been to the doctor yet?


Speaker 1 : But I thought you said that . . . Miss Cardew was a little too much interested in your poor brother Ernest? Won't she feel his loss a good deal?
Speaker 2 : Oh, that is all right. Cecily is not a silly romantic girl, I am glad to say. She has got a capital appetite, goes long walks, and pays no attention at all to her lessons.
Speaker 1 : I would rather like to see Cecily.
Speaker 2 : I will take very good care you never do. She is excessively pretty, and she is only just eighteen.
Speaker 1 : Have you told Gwendolen yet that you have an excessively pretty ward who is only just eighteen?
Speaker 2 : Oh! one doesn't blurt these things out to people. Cecily and Gwendolen are perfectly certain to be extremely great friends. I'll bet you anything you like that half an hour after they have met, they will be calling each other sister.
Speaker 1 : Women only do that when they have called each other a lot of other things first. Now, my dear boy, if we want to get a good table at Willis's, we really must go and dress. Do you know it is nearly seven?
Speaker 2 : Oh! It always is nearly seven.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I undersyandit almost food time


Speaker 1 : I never knew you when you weren't . . .
Speaker 2 : What shall we do after dinner? Go to a theatre?
Speaker 1 : Oh no! I loathe listening.
Speaker 2 : Well, let us go to the Club?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : well, what do you suggest we do?


Speaker 1 : Well, we might trot round to the Empire at ten?
Speaker 2 : Oh, no! I can't bear looking at things. It is so silly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok ok don’t get angry. I was just trying to funny! Lets fo trotnear the empire.


Speaker 1 : Algy, kindly turn your back. I have something very particular to say to Mr. Worthing.
Speaker 2 : Really, Gwendolen, I don't think I can allow this at all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok gwendolen. I understand what you mean. I don’t want to make things any more difficult for you.


Speaker 1 : My own darling!
Speaker 2 : Ernest, we may never be married. From the expression on mamma's face I fear we never shall. Few parents nowadays pay any regard to what their children say to them. The old-fashioned respect for the young is fast dying out. Whatever influence I ever had over mamma, I lost at the age of three. But although she may prevent us from becoming man and wife, and I may marry some one else, and marry often, nothing that she can possibly do can alter my eternal devotion to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry. I am dying to marry you but what should we do about my family?


Speaker 1 : The story of your romantic origin, as related to me by mamma, with unpleasing comments, has naturally stirred the deeper fibres of my nature. Your Christian name has an irresistible fascination. The simplicity of your character makes you exquisitely incomprehensible to me. Your town address at the Albany I have. What is your address in the country?
Speaker 2 : The Manor House, Woolton, Hertfordshire.
Speaker 1 : There is a good postal service, I suppose? It may be necessary to do something desperate. That of course will require serious consideration. I will communicate with you daily.
Speaker 2 : My own one!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. I am here for as long as you want me here.


Speaker 1 : You will let me see you to your carriage, my own darling?
Speaker 2 : Certainly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please!


Speaker 1 : Yes, sir.
Speaker 2 : A glass of sherry, Lane.
Speaker 1 : Yes, sir.
Speaker 2 : To-morrow, Lane, I'm going Bunburying.
Speaker 1 : Yes, sir.
Speaker 2 : I shall probably not be back till Monday. You can put up my dress clothes, my smoking jacket, and all the Bunbury suits . . .
Speaker 1 : Yes, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope the same fo you sir.


Speaker 2 : There's a sensible, intellectual girl! the only girl I ever cared for in my life. What on earth are you so amused at?
Speaker 1 : Oh, I'm a little anxious about poor Bunbury, that is all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your concern and I shall take it in consideration. Please don’t loose your cool over it now.


Speaker 2 : Cecily, Cecily! Surely such a utilitarian occupation as the watering of flowers is rather Moulton's duty than yours? Especially at a moment when intellectual pleasures await you. Your German grammar is on the table. Pray open it at page fifteen. We will repeat yesterday's lesson.
Speaker 1 : But I don't like German. It isn't at all a becoming language. I know perfectly well that I look quite plain after my German lesson.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Is there anything I could do to help this anxiousness?


Speaker 2 : Dear Uncle Jack is so very serious! Sometimes he is so serious that I think he cannot be quite well.
Speaker 1 : Your guardian enjoys the best of health, and his gravity of demeanour is especially to be commended in one so comparatively young as he is. I know no one who has a higher sense of duty and responsibility.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! we should have noticed that earlier. Poor him we made him so sad and never noticed it!


Speaker 2 : Cecily! I am surprised at you. Mr. Worthing has many troubles in his life. Idle merriment and triviality would be out of place in his conversation. You must remember his constant anxiety about that unfortunate young man his brother.
Speaker 1 : I wish Uncle Jack would allow that unfortunate young man, his brother, to come down here sometimes. We might have a good influence over him, Miss Prism. I am sure you certainly would. You know German, and geology, and things of that kind influence a man very much.
Speaker 2 : I do not think that even I could produce any effect on a character that according to his own brother's admission is irretrievably weak and vacillating. Indeed I am not sure that I would desire to reclaim him. I am not in favour of this modern mania for turning bad people into good people at a moment's notice. As a man sows so let him reap. You must put away your diary, Cecily. I really don't see why you should keep a diary at all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a good thing that you write.


Speaker 1 : Memory, my dear Cecily, is the diary that we all carry about with us.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but it usually chronicles the things that have never happened, and couldn't possibly have happened. I believe that Memory is responsible for nearly all the three-volume novels that Mudie sends us.
Speaker 1 : Do not speak slightingly of the three-volume novel, Cecily. I wrote one myself in earlier days.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! You must be the first hater of happy endings.


Speaker 2 : The good ended happily, and the bad unhappily. That is what Fiction means.
Speaker 1 : I suppose so. But it seems very unfair. And was your novel ever published?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! no wonder you sound so sad. We deserve to know the end.


Speaker 2 : I hope, Cecily, you are not inattentive.
Speaker 1 : Oh, I am afraid I am.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I am afraid not


Speaker 2 : We do not expect him till Monday afternoon.
Speaker 1 : Ah yes, he usually likes to spend his Sunday in London. He is not one of those whose sole aim is enjoyment, as, by all accounts, that unfortunate young man his brother seems to be. But I must not disturb Egeria and her pupil any longer.
Speaker 2 : Egeria? My name is Lætitia, Doctor.
Speaker 1 : A classical allusion merely, drawn from the Pagan authors. I shall see you both no doubt at Evensong?
Speaker 2 : I think, dear Doctor, I will have a stroll with you. I find I have a headache after all, and a walk might do it good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That would be delightful. 


Speaker 1 : Horrid Political Economy! Horrid Geography! Horrid, horrid German!
Speaker 2 : Mr. Ernest Worthing has just driven over from the station. He has brought his luggage with him.
Speaker 1 : ‘Mr. Ernest Worthing, B. , The Albany, W.' Uncle Jack's brother! Did you tell him Mr. Worthing was in town?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! You sound sad. Was he very upset about it?


Speaker 2 : Ask Mr. Ernest Worthing to come here. I suppose you had better talk to the housekeeper about a room for him.
Speaker 1 : Yes, Miss.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid. I am sure he will be beyond your expectations


Speaker 2 : You are my little cousin Cecily, I'm sure.
Speaker 1 : You are under some strange mistake. I am not little. In fact, I believe I am more than usually tall for my age. But I am your cousin Cecily. You, I see from your card, are Uncle Jack's brother, my cousin Ernest, my wicked cousin Ernest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry ernest. I dint mean to offend you. I was trying to be funny but I can see I have hurt you


Speaker 2 : If you are not, then you have certainly been deceiving us all in a very inexcusable manner. I hope you have not been leading a double life, pretending to be wicked and being really good all the time. That would be hypocrisy.
Speaker 1 : Oh! Of course I have been rather reckless.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very happy


Speaker 2 : In fact, now you mention the subject, I have been very bad in my own small way.
Speaker 1 : I don't think you should be so proud of that, though I am sure it must have been very pleasant.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s sweet of you to say.


Speaker 2 : I can't understand how you are here at all. Uncle Jack won't be back till Monday afternoon.
Speaker 1 : That is a great disappointment. I am obliged to go up by the first train on Monday morning. I have a business appointment that I am anxious . . . to miss?
Speaker 2 : Couldn't you miss it anywhere but in London?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I understand.


Speaker 1 : Well, I know, of course, how important it is not to keep a business engagement, if one wants to retain any sense of the beauty of life, but still I think you had better wait till Uncle Jack arrives. I know he wants to speak to you about your emigrating.
Speaker 2 : About my what?
Speaker 1 : Your emigrating. He has gone up to buy your outfit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! I am going to tease him about this.


Speaker 2 : I don't think you will require neckties. Uncle Jack is sending you to Australia.
Speaker 1 : Australia! I'd sooner die.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? We have differing opinions about this then.


Speaker 2 : Oh, well! The accounts I have received of Australia and the next world, are not particularly encouraging. This world is good enough for me, cousin Cecily.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but are you good enough for it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry about it. I shall help you in whatevery way I possibly could.


Speaker 2 : I'm afraid I've no time, this afternoon.
Speaker 1 : Well, would you mind my reforming myself this afternoon?
Speaker 2 : It is rather Quixotic of you. But I think you should try.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear, you look happier too


Speaker 1 : You are looking a little worse.
Speaker 2 : That is because I am hungry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course. Thanks for asking


Speaker 1 : Thank you. Might I have a buttonhole first? I never have any appetite unless I have a buttonhole first.
Speaker 2 : A Marechal Niel?
Speaker 1 : No, I'd sooner have a pink rose.
Speaker 2 : Why?
Speaker 1 : Because you are like a pink rose, Cousin Cecily.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think she should. You are lovely


Speaker 2 : You are too much alone, dear Dr. Chasuble. You should get married. A misanthrope I can understand—a womanthrope, never!
Speaker 1 : Believe me, I do not deserve so neologistic a phrase. The precept as well as the practice of the Primitive Church was distinctly against matrimony.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so! I really had no idea. Thanks!


Speaker 2 : But is a man not equally attractive when married?
Speaker 1 : No married man is ever attractive except to his wife.
Speaker 2 : And often, I've been told, not even to her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Lets find her.


Speaker 1 : Dead!
Speaker 2 : Your brother Ernest dead?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I am so sorry for your loss. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : Poor Ernest! He had many faults, but it is a sad, sad blow.
Speaker 2 : Very sad indeed. Were you with him at the end?
Speaker 1 : No. He died abroad; in Paris, in fact. I had a telegram last night from the manager of the Grand Hotel.
Speaker 2 : Was the cause of death mentioned?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that must have hurt you even more. If I may ask, whats going on in your head right now?


Speaker 1 : Oh yes.
Speaker 2 : People who live entirely for pleasure usually are.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that would be lovely!


Speaker 1 : But surely, Mr. Worthing, you have been christened already?
Speaker 2 : I don't remember anything about it.
Speaker 1 : But have you any grave doubts on the subject?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no not at all. I dint mean to offend you so please set the anger aside. You are not a bother.


Speaker 2 : Not at all. The sprinkling, and, indeed, the immersion of adults is a perfectly canonical practice.
Speaker 1 : Immersion!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. What do you suggest?


Speaker 2 : Oh, I might trot round about five if that would suit you.
Speaker 1 : Perfectly, perfectly! In fact I have two similar ceremonies to perform at that time. A case of twins that occurred recently in one of the outlying cottages on your own estate. Poor Jenkins the carter, a most hard-working man.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure we can work something out that the time.


Speaker 2 : This seems to me a blessing of an extremely obvious kind.
Speaker 1 : Uncle Jack! Oh, I am pleased to see you back. But what horrid clothes you have got on! Do go and change them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry! I just meant that you look out of place now. I dint mean to make anyone angry.


Speaker 2 : Who?
Speaker 1 : Your brother Ernest. He arrived about half an hour ago.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Then who is it inside? Before that spit your anger and have a calm conversation with him.


Speaker 2 : Nothing will induce me to take his hand. I think his coming down here disgraceful. He knows perfectly well why.
Speaker 1 : Uncle Jack, do be nice. There is some good in every one. Ernest has just been telling me about his poor invalid friend Mr. Bunbury whom he goes to visit so often. And surely there must be much good in one who is kind to an invalid, and leaves the pleasures of London to sit by a bed of pain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure why bunbury makes you so angry. Could you please tell me?


Speaker 2 : You young scoundrel, Algy, you must get out of this place as soon as possible. I don't allow any Bunburying here.
Speaker 1 : I have put Mr. Ernest's things in the room next to yours, sir. I suppose that is all right?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry sir. I don’t mean to upset you but I was instructed to do so.


Speaker 2 : Yes, you have.
Speaker 1 : I haven't heard any one call me.
Speaker 2 : Your duty as a gentleman calls you back.
Speaker 1 : My duty as a gentleman has never interfered with my pleasures in the smallest degree.
Speaker 2 : I can quite understand that.
Speaker 1 : Well, Cecily is a darling.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry. I was merely appreciating her.


Speaker 2 : Well, I don't like your clothes. You look perfectly ridiculous in them. Why on earth don't you go up and change? It is perfectly childish to be in deep mourning for a man who is actually staying for a whole week with you in your house as a guest. I call it grotesque.
Speaker 1 : You are certainly not staying with me for a whole week as a guest or anything else. You have got to leave . . . by the four-five train.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t get angry. I dint mean to offend you but asking you reason for staying. I just dint want to cause you any trouble.


Speaker 2 : Well, will you go if I change my clothes?
Speaker 1 : Yes, if you are not too long. I never saw anybody take so long to dress, and with such little result.
Speaker 2 : Well, at any rate, that is better than being always over-dressed as you are.
Speaker 1 : If I am occasionally a little over-dressed, I make up for it by being always immensely over-educated.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think it has been a great success. I'm in love with Cecily, and that is everything.


Speaker 2 : Oh, I merely came back to water the roses. I thought you were with Uncle Jack.
Speaker 1 : He's gone to order the dog-cart for me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope so! it would be fun.


Speaker 2 : He's going to send me away.
Speaker 1 : Then have we got to part?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it really is always painful to part from people. But don’t be so sad, I am sure we will figure something out.


Speaker 2 : The dog-cart is at the door, sir.
Speaker 1 : It can wait, Merriman for . . . five minutes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 2 : I hope, Cecily, I shall not offend you if I state quite frankly and openly that you seem to me to be in every way the visible personification of absolute perfection.
Speaker 1 : I think your frankness does you great credit, Ernest. If you will allow me, I will copy your remarks into my diary.
Speaker 2 : Do you really keep a diary? I'd give anything to look at it. May I?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look really happy to take anything on.


Speaker 1 : Ahem! Ahem!
Speaker 2 : Oh, don't cough, Ernest. When one is dictating one should speak fluently and not cough. Besides, I don't know how to spell a cough.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! That’s so lovely. I love you too!


Speaker 1 : The dog-cart is waiting, sir.
Speaker 2 : Tell it to come round next week, at the same hour.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : Uncle Jack would be very much annoyed if he knew you were staying on till next week, at the same hour.
Speaker 2 : Oh, I don't care about Jack. I don't care for anybody in the whole world but you. I love you, Cecily. You will marry me, won't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : three months? Congratulations!


Speaker 1 : For the last three months?
Speaker 2 : Yes, it will be exactly three months on Thursday.
Speaker 1 : But how did we become engaged?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be so sad my dear. I am so happy to hear this. 


Speaker 2 : Darling! And when was the engagement actually settled?
Speaker 1 : On the th of February last. Worn out by your entire ignorance of my existence, I determined to end the matter one way or the other, and after a long struggle with myself I accepted you under this dear old tree here. The next day I bought this little ring in your name, and this is the little bangle with the true lover's knot I promised you always to wear.
Speaker 2 : Did I give you this? It's very pretty, isn't it?
Speaker 1 : Yes, you've wonderfully good taste, Ernest. It's the excuse I've always given for your leading such a bad life. And this is the box in which I keep all your dear letters.
Speaker 2 : My letters! But, my own sweet Cecily, I have never written you any letters.
Speaker 1 : You need hardly remind me of that, Ernest. I remember only too well that I was forced to write your letters for you. I wrote always three times a week, and sometimes oftener.
Speaker 2 : Oh, do let me read them, Cecily?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh dear cecily. I was at my worst when we parted. Don’t be sad now. I am sure it will all be good now.


Speaker 1 : But was our engagement ever broken off?
Speaker 2 : Of course it was. On the nd of last March. You can see the entry if you like. ‘To-day I broke off my engagement with Ernest. I feel it is better to do so. The weather still continues charming.'
Speaker 1 : But why on earth did you break it off? What had I done? I had done nothing at all. Cecily, I am very much hurt indeed to hear you broke it off. Particularly when the weather was so charming.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you made the right choice at the time. We are what we are today because of the past.


Speaker 2 : What a perfect angel you are, Cecily.
Speaker 1 : You dear romantic boy. I hope your hair curls naturally, does it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you so happy.


Speaker 2 : I am so glad.
Speaker 1 : You'll never break off our engagement again, Cecily?
Speaker 2 : I don't think I could break it off now that I have actually met you. Besides, of course, there is the question of your name.
Speaker 1 : Yes, of course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are funny! I am glad you get your wish and look so joyous.


Speaker 2 : But, my dear child, do you mean to say you could not love me if I had some other name?
Speaker 1 : But what name?
Speaker 2 : Oh, any name you like—Algernon—for instance . . .
GOLDEN RESPONSE : then I am glad I am not named that!


Speaker 1 : Well, my own dear, sweet, loving little darling, I really can't see why you should object to the name of Algernon. It is not at all a bad name. In fact, it is rather an aristocratic name. Half of the chaps who get into the Bankruptcy Court are called Algernon. But seriously, Cecily . . . . . . if my name was Algy, couldn't you love me?
Speaker 2 : I might respect you, Ernest, I might admire your character, but I fear that I should not be able to give you my undivided attention.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really! That’s good.


Speaker 1 : Oh, yes. Dr. Chasuble is a most learned man. He has never written a single book, so you can imagine how much he knows.
Speaker 2 : I must see him at once on a most important christening—I mean on most important business.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its nothing to worry about. I just want to talk about something.


Speaker 1 : I shan't be away more than half an hour.
Speaker 2 : Considering that we have been engaged since February the th, and that I only met you to-day for the first time, I think it is rather hard that you should leave me for so long a period as half an hour. Couldn't you make it twenty minutes?
Speaker 1 : I'll be back in no time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that would be lovely. Make sure your wirte it and keep it as a memory forever.


Speaker 2 : A Miss Fairfax has just called to see Mr. Worthing. On very important business, Miss Fairfax states.
Speaker 1 : Isn't Mr. Worthing in his library?
Speaker 2 : Mr. Worthing went over in the direction of the Rectory some time ago.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : surely mam.


Speaker 1 : Yes, Miss.
Speaker 2 : Miss Fairfax! I suppose one of the many good elderly women who are associated with Uncle Jack in some of his philanthropic work in London. I don't quite like women who are interested in philanthropic work. I think it is so forward of them.
Speaker 1 : Miss Fairfax.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nice to meet you miss. Please have a seat.


Speaker 2 : Cecily Cardew? What a very sweet name! Something tells me that we are going to be great friends. I like you already more than I can say. My first impressions of people are never wrong.
Speaker 1 : How nice of you to like me so much after we have known each other such a comparatively short time. Pray sit down.
Speaker 2 : I may call you Cecily, may I not?
Speaker 1 : With pleasure!
Speaker 2 : And you will always call me Gwendolen, won't you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : Then that is all quite settled, is it not?
Speaker 2 : I hope so.
Speaker 1 : Perhaps this might be a favourable opportunity for my mentioning who I am. My father is Lord Bracknell. You have never heard of papa, I suppose?
Speaker 2 : I don't think so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no not at all. Do whatever makes you happy as you are now.


Speaker 1 : Oh! not at all, Gwendolen. I am very fond of being looked at.
Speaker 2 : You are here on a short visit, I suppose.
Speaker 1 : Oh no! I live here.
Speaker 2 : Really? Your mother, no doubt, or some female relative of advanced years, resides here also?
Speaker 1 : Oh no! I have no mother, nor, in fact, any relations.
Speaker 2 : Indeed?
Speaker 1 : My dear guardian, with the assistance of Miss Prism, has the arduous task of looking after me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh nothing to worry about. They look after me quite well.


Speaker 2 : Yes, I am Mr. Worthing's ward.
Speaker 1 : Oh! It is strange he never mentioned to me that he had a ward. How secretive of him! He grows more interesting hourly. I am not sure, however, that the news inspires me with feelings of unmixed delight. I am very fond of you, Cecily; I have liked you ever since I met you! But I am bound to state that now that I know that you are Mr. Worthing's ward, I cannot help expressing a wish you were—well, just a little older than you seem to be—and not quite so very alluring in appearance. In fact, if I may speak candidly—
Speaker 2 : Pray do! I think that whenever one has anything unpleasant to say, one should always be quite candid.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh you sound so happy talking about him. I hope I get to meet him someday.


Speaker 1 : I beg your pardon, Gwendolen, did you say Ernest?
Speaker 2 : Yes.
Speaker 1 : Oh, but it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is my guardian. It is his brother—his elder brother.
Speaker 2 : Ernest never mentioned to me that he had a brother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s sad. Have you any idea why?


Speaker 1 : Ah! that accounts for it. And now that I think of it I have never heard any man mention his brother. The subject seems distasteful to most men. Cecily, you have lifted a load from my mind. I was growing almost anxious. It would have been terrible if any cloud had come across a friendship like ours, would it not? Of course you are quite, quite sure that it is not Mr. Ernest Worthing who is your guardian?
Speaker 2 : Quite sure. In fact, I am going to be his.
Speaker 1 : I beg your pardon?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. I would be livid if I was in your place. Lets calm down and talk this through to clear any confusion.


Speaker 2 : My darling Cecily, I think there must be some slight error. Mr. Ernest Worthing is engaged to me. The announcement will appear in the Morning Post on Saturday at the latest.
Speaker 1 : I am afraid you must be under some misconception. Ernest proposed to me exactly ten minutes ago.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : based on the surprised look on your face I am starting to doubt my truth. Lets verify this.


Speaker 2 : It would distress me more than I can tell you, dear Gwendolen, if it caused you any mental or physical anguish, but I feel bound to point out that since Ernest proposed to you he clearly has changed his mind.
Speaker 1 : If the poor fellow has been entrapped into any foolish promise I shall consider it my duty to rescue him at once, and with a firm hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad, I am sure he has a justified explanation for his actions.


Speaker 2 : Do you allude to me, Miss Cardew, as an entanglement? You are presumptuous. On an occasion of this kind it becomes more than a moral duty to speak one's mind. It becomes a pleasure.
Speaker 1 : Do you suggest, Miss Fairfax, that I entrapped Ernest into an engagement? How dare you? This is no time for wearing the shallow mask of manners. When I see a spade I call it a spade.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand we are both under stress. Lets not take jabs at each other and try to clear this out shall we?


Speaker 2 : Are there many interesting walks in the vicinity, Miss Cardew?
Speaker 1 : Oh! yes! a great many. From the top of one of the hills quite close one can see five counties.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh come on! Don’t get upset about crowds. You could always say no


Speaker 2 : I suppose that is why you live in town?
Speaker 1 : Quite a well-kept garden this is, Miss Cardew.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.


Speaker 2 : I had no idea there were any flowers in the country.
Speaker 1 : Oh, flowers are as common here, Miss Fairfax, as people are in London.
Speaker 2 : Personally I cannot understand how anybody manages to exist in the country, if anybody who is anybody does. The country always bores me to death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you! Tea is all I want right now.


Speaker 1 : Thank you. Detestable girl! But I require tea!
Speaker 2 : Sugar?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 1 : Cake or bread and butter?
Speaker 2 : Bread and butter, please. Cake is rarely seen at the best houses nowadays.
Speaker 1 : Hand that to Miss Fairfax.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I dint mean to make you angry. I wa trying to be nice and it turned out to be all the things you dislike. I am sorry about that.


Speaker 2 : To save my poor, innocent, trusting boy from the machinations of any other girl there are no lengths to which I would not go.
Speaker 1 : From the moment I saw you I distrusted you. I felt that you were false and deceitful. I am never deceived in such matters. My first impressions of people are invariably right.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you understand.


Speaker 2 : My own love!
Speaker 1 : A moment, Ernest! May I ask you—are you engaged to be married to this young lady?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes her! Are you engaged to her?


Speaker 2 : You will call me sister, will you not?
Speaker 1 : There is just one question I would like to be allowed to ask my guardian.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Let me see if I can dinf him


Speaker 2 : Had you never a brother of any kind?
Speaker 1 : Never. Not even of any kind.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. What should we do?


Speaker 2 : It is not a very pleasant position for a young girl suddenly to find herself in. Is it?
Speaker 1 : Let us go into the house. They will hardly venture to come after us there.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes they are. Now lets not loose our cool over these cowards. Lets try to be happy in our own lives.


Speaker 2 : This ghastly state of things is what you call Bunburying, I suppose?
Speaker 1 : Yes, and a perfectly wonderful Bunbury it is. The most wonderful Bunbury I have ever had in my life.
Speaker 2 : Well, you've no right whatsoever to Bunbury here.
Speaker 1 : That is absurd. One has a right to Bunbury anywhere one chooses. Every serious Bunburyist knows that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry. Its just from where we have originated.


Speaker 2 : Well, one must be serious about something, if one wants to have any amusement in life. I happen to be serious about Bunburying. What on earth you are serious about I haven't got the remotest idea. About everything, I should fancy. You have such an absolutely trivial nature.
Speaker 1 : Well, the only small satisfaction I have in the whole of this wretched business is that your friend Bunbury is quite exploded. You won't be able to run down to the country quite so often as you used to do, dear Algy. And a very good thing too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to get you more worked up but could you refrain from degrading my brother?


Speaker 2 : As for your conduct towards Miss Cardew, I must say that your taking in a sweet, simple, innocent girl like that is quite inexcusable. To say nothing of the fact that she is my ward.
Speaker 1 : I can see no possible defence at all for your deceiving a brilliant, clever, thoroughly experienced young lady like Miss Fairfax. To say nothing of the fact that she is my cousin.
Speaker 2 : I wanted to be engaged to Gwendolen, that is all. I love her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look so happy just thinking about it. I am sure that would have given you the greatest joy


Speaker 1 : There is certainly no chance of your marrying Miss Cardew.
Speaker 2 : I don't think there is much likelihood, Jack, of you and Miss Fairfax being united.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry but I just said what I felt after analyzing the situation. All I wish is that you don’t have any false hopes.


Speaker 1 : If it was my business, I wouldn't talk about it. It is very vulgar to talk about one's business. Only people like stock-brokers do that, and then merely at dinner parties.
Speaker 2 : How can you sit there, calmly eating muffins when we are in this horrible trouble, I can't make out. You seem to me to be perfectly heartless.
Speaker 1 : Well, I can't eat muffins in an agitated manner. The butter would probably get on my cuffs. One should always eat muffins quite calmly. It is the only way to eat them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I undrstand your point but right now this is my only sourse of happiness.


Speaker 2 : When I am in trouble, eating is the only thing that consoles me. Indeed, when I am in really great trouble, as any one who knows me intimately will tell you, I refuse everything except food and drink. At the present moment I am eating muffins because I am unhappy. Besides, I am particularly fond of muffins.
Speaker 1 : Well, that is no reason why you should eat them all in that greedy way.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you don’t? that’s a shock!


Speaker 2 : Good heavens! I suppose a man may eat his own muffins in his own garden.
Speaker 1 : But you have just said it was perfectly heartless to eat muffins.
Speaker 2 : I said it was perfectly heartless of you, under the circumstances. That is a very different thing.
Speaker 1 : That may be. But the muffins are the same.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish that too. Lets hope for the best


Speaker 2 : You can't possibly ask me to go without having some dinner. It's absurd. I never go without my dinner. No one ever does, except vegetarians and people like that. Besides I have just made arrangements with Dr. Chasuble to be christened at a quarter to six under the name of Ernest.
Speaker 1 : My dear fellow, the sooner you give up that nonsense the better. I made arrangements this morning with Dr. Chasuble to be christened myself at ., and I naturally will take the name of Ernest. Gwendolen would wish it. We can't both be christened Ernest. It's absurd. Besides, I have a perfect right to be christened if I like. There is no evidence at all that I have ever been christened by anybody. I should think it extremely probable I never was, and so does Dr. Chasuble. It is entirely different in your case. You have been christened already.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but I have not been christened for years.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have? Maybe you are right. I should see the positive side.


Speaker 1 : Quite so. So I know my constitution can stand it. If you are not quite sure about your ever having been christened, I must say I think it rather dangerous your venturing on it now. It might make you very unwell. You can hardly have forgotten that some one very closely connected with you was very nearly carried off this week in Paris by a severe chill.
Speaker 2 : Yes, but you said yourself that a severe chill was not hereditary.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you always look so happy talking about science.


Speaker 1 : Oh, that is nonsense; you are always talking nonsense.
Speaker 2 : Jack, you are at the muffins again! I wish you wouldn't. There are only two left. I told you I was particularly fond of muffins.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes I had forgotten. I apologize. Don’t be angry. You can have something else.


Speaker 1 : The fact that they did not follow us at once into the house, as any one else would have done, seems to me to show that they have some sense of shame left.
Speaker 2 : They have been eating muffins. That looks like repentance.
Speaker 1 : They don't seem to notice us at all. Couldn't you cough?
Speaker 2 : But I haven't got a cough.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t pay attention to them. Lets calm down and enjoy this time together.


Speaker 1 : They're approaching. That's very forward of them.
Speaker 2 : Let us preserve a dignified silence.
Speaker 1 : Certainly. It's the only thing to do now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : youo are right. You look very unhappy. Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : A most distasteful one.
Speaker 1 : But we will not be the first to speak.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a good plan. Now lets not be angry and keep on with our lives.


Speaker 2 : I am more than content with what Mr. Moncrieff said. His voice alone inspires one with absolute credulity.
Speaker 1 : Then you think we should forgive them?
Speaker 2 : Yes. I mean no.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Let me know if I can help


Speaker 1 : Gwendolen! What does this mean?
Speaker 2 : Merely that I am engaged to be married to Mr. Worthing, mamma.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to cause any more sadness to you on this topic. I just seek some clarity.


Speaker 1 : Yes, Aunt Augusta.
Speaker 2 : May I ask if it is in this house that your invalid friend Mr. Bunbury resides?
Speaker 1 : Oh! No! Bunbury doesn't live here. Bunbury is somewhere else at present. In fact, Bunbury is dead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes it was. We were all just as sad as you are.


Speaker 2 : Oh! I killed Bunbury this afternoon. I mean poor Bunbury died this afternoon.
Speaker 1 : What did he die of?
Speaker 2 : Bunbury? Oh, he was quite exploded.
Speaker 1 : Exploded! Was he the victim of a revolutionary outrage? I was not aware that Mr. Bunbury was interested in social legislation. If so, he is well punished for his morbidity.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so sad. I shouldn’t have brought his death up.


Speaker 2 : Miss Cardew is the grand-daughter of the late Mr. Thomas Cardew of Belgrave Square, S.W.; Gervase Park, Dorking, Surrey; and the Sporran, Fifeshire, N.B.
Speaker 1 : That sounds not unsatisfactory. Three addresses always inspire confidence, even in tradesmen. But what proof have I of their authenticity?
Speaker 2 : I have carefully preserved the Court Guides of the period. They are open to your inspection, Lady Bracknell.
Speaker 1 : I have known strange errors in that publication.
Speaker 2 : Miss Cardew's family solicitors are Messrs. Markby, Markby, and Markby.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great. I can see how happy that has made you.


Speaker 1 : How extremely kind of you, Lady Bracknell! I have also in my possession, you will be pleased to hear, certificates of Miss Cardew's birth, baptism, whooping cough, registration, vaccination, confirmation, and the measles; both the German and the English variety.
Speaker 2 : Ah! A life crowded with incident, I see; though perhaps somewhat too exciting for a young girl. I am not myself in favour of premature experiences. Gwendolen! the time approaches for our departure. We have not a moment to lose. As a matter of form, Mr. Worthing, I had better ask you if Miss Cardew has any little fortune?
Speaker 1 : Oh! about a hundred and thirty thousand pounds in the Funds. That is all. Goodbye, Lady Bracknell. So pleased to have seen you.
Speaker 2 : A moment, Mr. Worthing. A hundred and thirty thousand pounds! And in the Funds! Miss Cardew seems to me a most attractive young lady, now that I look at her. Few girls of the present day have any really solid qualities, any of the qualities that last, and improve with time. We live, I regret to say, in an age of surfaces. Come over here, dear. Pretty child! your dress is sadly simple, and your hair seems almost as Nature might have left it. But we can soon alter all that. A thoroughly experienced French maid produces a really marvellous result in a very brief space of time. I remember recommending one to young Lady Lancing, and after three months her own husband did not know her.
Speaker 1 : And after six months nobody knew her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand Aunty


Speaker 2 : Yes, Aunt Augusta!
Speaker 1 : There are distinct social possibilities in Miss Cardew's profile.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you like her. 


Speaker 2 : Thank you, Lady Bracknell.
Speaker 1 : You may also address me as Aunt Augusta for the future.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are welcome my child.


Speaker 2 : To speak frankly, I am not in favour of long engagements. They give people the opportunity of finding out each other's character before marriage, which I think is never advisable.
Speaker 1 : I beg your pardon for interrupting you, Lady Bracknell, but this engagement is quite out of the question. I am Miss Cardew's guardian, and she cannot marry without my consent until she comes of age. That consent I absolutely decline to give.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I just had a few doubts so I was sceptical about him.


Speaker 2 : It pains me very much to have to speak frankly to you, Lady Bracknell, about your nephew, but the fact is that I do not approve at all of his moral character. I suspect him of being untruthful.
Speaker 1 : Untruthful! My nephew Algernon? Impossible! He is an Oxonian.
Speaker 2 : I fear there can be no possible doubt about the matter. This afternoon during my temporary absence in London on an important question of romance, he obtained admission to my house by means of the false pretence of being my brother. Under an assumed name he drank, I've just been informed by my butler, an entire pint bottle of my Perrier-Jouet, Brut, '; wine I was specially reserving for myself. Continuing his disgraceful deception, he succeeded in the course of the afternoon in alienating the affections of my only ward. He subsequently stayed to tea, and devoured every single muffin. And what makes his conduct all the more heartless is, that he was perfectly well aware from the first that I have no brother, that I never had a brother, and that I don't intend to have a brother, not even of any kind. I distinctly told him so myself yesterday afternoon.
Speaker 1 : Ahem! Mr. Worthing, after careful consideration I have decided entirely to overlook my nephew's conduct to you.
Speaker 2 : That is very generous of you, Lady Bracknell. My own decision, however, is unalterable. I decline to give my consent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Well, I am really only eighteen, but I always admit to twenty when I go to evening parties.


Speaker 1 : Algy, could you wait for me till I was thirty-five?
Speaker 2 : Of course I could, Cecily. You know I could.
Speaker 1 : Yes, I felt it instinctively, but I couldn't wait all that time. I hate waiting even five minutes for anybody. It always makes me rather cross. I am not punctual myself, I know, but I do like punctuality in others, and waiting, even to be married, is quite out of the question.
Speaker 1 : My dear Mr. Worthing, as Miss Cardew states positively that she cannot wait till she is thirty-five—a remark which I am bound to say seems to me to show a somewhat impatient nature—I would beg of you to reconsider your decision.
Speaker 2 : But my dear Lady Bracknell, the matter is entirely in your own hands. The moment you consent to my marriage with Gwendolen, I will most gladly allow your nephew to form an alliance with my ward.
Speaker 1 : You must be quite aware that what you propose is out of the question.
Speaker 2 : Then a passionate celibacy is all that any of us can look forward to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I don’t want to cause you any more sorrow. Lets leave.


Speaker 1 : Everything is quite ready for the christenings.
Speaker 2 : The christenings, sir! Is not that somewhat premature?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : they have? At this age? They must really want it.


Speaker 1 : Miss Prism! Did I hear you mention a Miss Prism?
Speaker 2 : Yes, Lady Bracknell. I am on my way to join her.
Speaker 1 : Pray allow me to detain you for a moment. This matter may prove to be one of vital importance to Lord Bracknell and myself. Is this Miss Prism a female of repellent aspect, remotely connected with education?
Speaker 2 : She is the most cultivated of ladies, and the very picture of respectability.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so worried. I am a celibate man


Speaker 1 : But where did you deposit the hand-bag?
Speaker 2 : Do not ask me, Mr. Worthing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : let me recollect and I shall let you know.


Speaker 1 : Your guardian has a very emotional nature.
Speaker 2 : This noise is extremely unpleasant. It sounds as if he was having an argument. I dislike arguments of any kind. They are always vulgar, and often convincing.
Speaker 1 : It has stopped now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : me too. Its been a long time pending.


Speaker 2 : It seems to be mine. Yes, here is the injury it received through the upsetting of a Gower Street omnibus in younger and happier days. Here is the stain on the lining caused by the explosion of a temperance beverage, an incident that occurred at Leamington. And here, on the lock, are my initials. I had forgotten that in an extravagant mood I had had them placed there. The bag is undoubtedly mine. I am delighted to have it so unexpectedly restored to me. It has been a great inconvenience being without it all these years.
Speaker 1 : Miss Prism, more is restored to you than this hand-bag. I was the baby you placed in it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes me! I don’t mean to startle. I just thought you should be aware.


Speaker 2 : Every luxury that money could buy, including christening, had been lavished on you by your fond and doting parents.
Speaker 1 : Then I was christened! That is settled. Now, what name was I given? Let me know the worst.
Speaker 2 : Being the eldest son you were naturally christened after your father.
Speaker 1 : Yes, but what was my father's Christian name?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ohh! You really look surprised by this conversation.


Speaker 2 : The General was essentially a man of peace, except in his domestic life. But I have no doubt his name would appear in any military directory.
Speaker 1 : The Army Lists of the last forty years are here. These delightful records should have been my constant study. M. Generals . . . Mallam, Maxbohm, Magley, what ghastly names they have—Markby, Migsby, Mobbs, Moncrieff! Lieutenant , Captain, Lieutenant-Colonel, Colonel, General , Christian names, Ernest John. I always told you, Gwendolen, my name was Ernest, didn't I? Well, it is Ernest after all. I mean it naturally is Ernest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes there is always a reason. I hope it is clear now.


Speaker 2 : Ernest! My own Ernest! I felt from the first that you could have no other name!
Speaker 1 : Gwendolen, it is a terrible thing for a man to find out suddenly that all his life he has been speaking nothing but the truth. Can you forgive me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for believing in me.


Speaker 2 : where is your leather apron and your rule? what do you with your best apparel on? you, sir, what trade are you?
Speaker 1 : truly, sir, in consideration of a fine workman, i am but, as you I wish say, a shoemaker.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you anymore. Like I said I am a shoemaker.


Speaker 2 : a trade, sir, that, i hope, i may use with a safe conscience; which is, indeed, sir, a mender of bad soles.
Speaker 1 : what trade, you servant? you insolent servant, what trade?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your situation.


Speaker 2 : thou are a shoemaker, are you?
Speaker 1 : truly, sir, all that i live by is with the awl: i meddle with no tradesman's matters, nor women's matters, but with awl. i am, indeed, sir, a surgeon to old shoes; when they are in great danger, i recover them. as belonging men as ever trod upon neat's leather have gone upon my handiwork.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger anybody. I wwas just wanted to get myself into more work


Speaker 2 : wherefore rejoice? what conquest brings he home? what tributaries follow him to rome, to grace in captive bonds his chariot-wheels? you blocks, you stones, you worse than senseless things! o you hard hearts, you cruel men of rome, knew you not pompey? many a time and often have you climb'd up to walls and battlements, to towers and windows, youa, to chimney-tops, your infants in your arms, and there have sat the livelong day, with patient expectation, to see great pompey pass the streets of rome: and when you saw his chariot but appear, have you not crazye an universal shout, that tiber trembled underneath her banks, to hear the replication of your sounds crazye in her overhanging banks? and do you now incite. ; reveal your best attire? and do you now cull angry a holiday? and do you now strew flowers in his way that comes in triumph over pompey's blood? be gone! run to your houses, fall upon your knees, pray to the gods to hold off the plague that needs must light on this ingratitude.
Speaker 1 : go, go, good countrymen, and, for this fault, assemble all the poor men of your sort; call them to tiber banks, and weep your tears into the channel, till the lowest stream do kiss the most exalted shores of all. see whether their basest metal be not moved; they vanish tongue-tied in their guiltiness. go you down that way towards the capitol; this way will i disrobe the images, if you do find them deck'd with ceremonies.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it. I am glad you llook happy at the mention of feast


Speaker 2 : caesar, my lord?
Speaker 1 : forget not, in your speed, antonius, to touch calpurnia; for our elders say, the barren, touched in this holy chase, shake off their sterile curse.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. You look really happy about it.


Speaker 2 : will you go see the order of the course?
Speaker 1 : not i.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your desperation but I am not fit for the job


Speaker 2 : i am not sportive: i do lack some part of that quick spirit that is in antony. let me not hinder, cassius, your desires; i'll leave you.
Speaker 1 : brutus, i do observe you now of late: i have not from your eyes that nobleness and show of love as i was wont to have: you bear too stubborn and too strange a hand over your friend that loves you.
Speaker 2 : cassius, be not deceived: if i have veil'd my look, i turn the trouble of my countenance merely upon myself. vexed i am of late with passions of some difference, conceptions only belonging to myself, which give some soil perhaps to my behaviors; but let not therefore my good friends be grieved among which number, cassius, be you one nor construe any further my neglect, than that poor brutus, with himself at war, forgets the shows of love to other men.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course yes. I am glad you accept your misunderstanding.


Speaker 1 : no, cassius; for the eye sees not itself, but by reflection, by some other things.
Speaker 2 : 'tis just: and it is very much lamented, brutus, that you have no such mirrors as will turn your hidden worthiness into your eye, that you might see your shadow. i have heard, where many of the best consideration in rome, except immortal caesar, speaking of brutus and groaning underneath this age's yoke, have wish'd that noble brutus had his eyes.
Speaker 1 : into what dangers I wish you lead me, cassius, that you I wish have me seek into myself for that which is not in me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much cassius. I know it will all work out in the end.


Speaker 2 : what means this shouting? i do frighten, the people choose caesar for their king.
Speaker 1 : ay, do you frighten it? then must i think you I wish not have it so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! You sound so happy in your bravery!


Speaker 2 : i know that virtue to be in you, brutus, as well as i do know your angryward feature. well, honour is the subject of my story. i cannot tell what you and other men think of this life; but, for my single self, i had as soon not be as live to be in awe of such a thing as i myself. i was born free as caesar; so were you: we both have fed as well, and we can both endure the winter's cold as well as he: for once, upon a raw and gusty day, the troubled tiber beating on her shores, caesar said to me 'darest you, cassius, now leap in with me into this angry flood, and swim to yonder point?' upon the word, accoutred as i was, i plunged in and bade him follow; so indeed he did. the torrent roar'd, and we did buffet it with lusty sinews, throwing it aside and stemming it with in rivalry; but ere we could arrive the point proposed, caesar cried 'help me, cassius, or i sink!' i, as aeneas, our great ancestor, did from the flames of troy upon his shoulder the old anchises bear, so from the waves of tiber did i the tired caesar. and this man is now become a god, and cassius is a wretched creature and must bend his body, if caesar carelessly but nod on him. he had a fever when he was in spain, and when the fit was on him, i did mark how he did shake: it is true, this god did shake; his coward lips did from their excuse fly, and that same eye whose bend does awe the world did lose his lustre: i did hear him groan: yes, and that tongue of his that bade the romans mark him and write his speeches in their books, alas, it cried 'give me some drink, tintinius,' as a sick girl. you gods, it does amaze me a man of such a feeble temper should so headstart of the majestic world and bear the palm alone.
Speaker 1 : another general shout! i do believe that these applauses are for some new honours that are heap'd on caesar.
Speaker 2 : why, man, he does bestride the narrow world like a colossus, and we petty men walk under his huge legs and peep about to find ourselves dishonourable burys. men at some time are masters of their amiable and satisfiedes: the fault, dear brutus, is not in our stars, but in ourselves, that we are underlings. brutus and caesar: what should be in that 'caesar'? why should that name be proclaimed more than yours? write them together, yours is as fair a name; sound them, it does become the mouth as well; weigh them, it is as mournful; conjure with 'em, brutus will start a spirit as soon as caesar. now, in the names of all the gods at once, upon what meat does this our caesar feed, that he is grown so great? age, you are shamed! rome, you have lost the breed of noble bloods! when went there by an age, since the great flood, but it was famed with more than with one man? when could they say till now, that talk'd of rome, that her wide walls encompass'd but one man? now is it rome indeed and room enough, when there is in it but one only man. o, you and i have heard our amiable and satisfiedhers say, there was a brutus once that I wish have brook'd the eternal devil to keep his state in rome as easily as a king.
Speaker 1 : that you do love me, i am nothing suspicious; what you I wish work me to, i have some aim: how i have yought of this and of these times, i shall recount hereafter; for this present, i I wish not, so with love i might entreat you, be any further moved. what you have said i will consider; what you have to say i will with patience hear, and find a time both belonging to hear and answer such high things. till then, my noble friend, chew upon this: brutus had rather be a villager than to repute himself a son of rome under these hard state of minds as this time is like to lay upon us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right but your words werent weak in any sense. 


Speaker 2 : the games are done and caesar is returning.
Speaker 1 : as they pass by, pluck casca by the sleeve; and he will, after his sour shape to our purpose, tell you what have proceeded worthy bill to-day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. Would it be okay to reconsider this conversation and understand each other's point?


Speaker 2 : antonius!
Speaker 1 : caesar?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. We must be careful


Speaker 2 : you pull'd me by the cloak; I wish you speak with me?
Speaker 1 : ay, casca; tell us what have chanced to-day, that caesar looks so sad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course I was. I dint mean to upset you but I dint want to talk out of turn.


Speaker 2 : i should not then ask casca what had chanced.
Speaker 1 : why, there was a crown offered him: and being offered him, he put it by with the back of his hand, thus; and then the people fell a-shouting.
Speaker 2 : what was the second noise for?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey its nothing to worry about. I am sure it must be something unimportant.


Speaker 1 : i know not what you mean by that; but, i am sure, caesar fell down. if the tag-rag people did not clap him and hiss him, according as he pleased and displeased them, as they use to do the players in the theatre, i am no true man.
Speaker 2 : what said he when he came unto himself?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 1 : did cicero say any thing?
Speaker 2 : ay, he spoke greek.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Please don’t be angry now. Lets find out more.


Speaker 1 : nay, an i tell you that, ill ne'er look you i' the face again: but those that understood him smiled at one another and shook their heads; but, for mine own part, it was greek to me. i could tell you more news too: marullus and flavius, for pulling scarfs off caesar's images, are a euphemism for executed. fare you well. there was more foolery yout, if i could remember it.
Speaker 2 : will you sup with me to-night, casca?
Speaker 1 : no, i am promised forth.
Speaker 2 : will you dine with me to-morrow?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t say such things. So dinner is set


Speaker 1 : what a blunt fellow is this grown to be! he was mentally sharp when he went to school.
Speaker 2 : so is he now in execution of any bold or noble enterprise, however he puts on this tardy form. this rudeness is a sauce to his good wit, which gives men stomach to digest his words with better appetite.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. Would it be okay to reconsider this conversation and understand each other's point?


Speaker 1 : good even, casca: brought you caesar home? why are you breathless? and why stare you so?
Speaker 2 : are not you moved, when all the sway of earth shakes like a thing unfirm? o cicero, i have seen tempests, when the scolding winds have split opend the knotty oaks, and i have seen the ambitious ocean swell and rage and foam, to be exalted with the threatening clouds: but never till to-night, never till now, did i go through a tempest thunderbolts. either there is a civil strife in heaven, or else the world, too saucy with the gods, incenses them to send destruction.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh yes! Absolutely. I shall take you there. You really look happy about it.


Speaker 1 : a common slaveyou know him well by sight held up his left hand, which did flame and burn like twenty torches join'd, and yout his hand, not sensible of fire, remain'd unscorch'd. besidesi ha' not since put up my sword against the capitol i met a lion, who glared upon me, and went surly by, without annoying me: and there were calln upon a heap a hundred ghastly women, transformed with their frighten; who swore they saw men all in fire walk up and down the streets. and yousterday the owl did sit even at noon-day upon the market-place, hooting and shrieking. when these unnatural events do so conjointly belonging, let not men say 'these are their reasons; they are natural;' for, i believe, they are portentous things unto the climate that they point upon.
Speaker 2 : indeed, it is a strange-disposed time: but men may construe things after their shape to our purpose, clean from the purpose of the things themselves. come caesar to the capitol to-morrow?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he does? see you tomorrow then


Speaker 1 : who's there?
Speaker 2 : a roman.
Speaker 1 : casca, by your voice.
Speaker 2 : your ear is good. cassius, what night is this!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : pleasing indeed. You really look happy about it.


Speaker 1 : who ever knew the heavens menace so?
Speaker 2 : those that have known the earth so full of faults. for my part, i have walk'd about the streets, submitting me unto the perilous night, and, thus open, casca, as you see, have bared my bosom to the thunderbolt; and when the cross blue lightning seem'd to open the breast of heaven, i did present myself even in the aim and very flash of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to frighten anybody.


Speaker 1 : you are dull, casca, and those sparks of life that should be in a roman you do lack, or else you use not. you look pale and gaze and incite. ; reveal frighten and cast yourself in wonder, to see the strange impatience of the heavens: but if you I wish consider the true cause why all these fires, why all these gliding ghosts, why birds and beasts from quality and kind, why old men fool and children calculate, why all these things change from their ordinance their natures and preformed faculties to monstrous quality,why, you shall find that heaven have infused them with these spirits, to make them instruments of frighten and warning unto some monstrous state. now could i, casca, name to you a man most like this dreadful night, that thunders, lightens, opens burys, and roars as does the lion in the capitol, a man no mightier than yourself or me in personal action, yout prodigious grown and frightenful, as these strange eruptions are.
Speaker 2 : 'tis caesar that you mean; is it not, cassius?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea.


Speaker 1 : indeed, they say the senators tomorrow mean to establish caesar as a king; and he shall wear his crown by sea and yard, in every place, save here in italy.
Speaker 2 : i know where i will wear this dagger then; cassius from bondage will deliver cassius: therein, you gods, you make the weak most strong; therein, you gods, you tyrants do defeat: nor stony tower, nor walls of beaten brass, nor airless dungeon, nor strong links of iron, can be retentive to the strength of spirit; but life, being weary of these worldly bars, never lacks power to dismiss itself. if i know this, know all the world besides, that part of tyranny that i do bear i can shake off at pleasure.
Speaker 1 : so can i: so every bondman in his own hand bears the power to cancel his captivity.
Speaker 2 : and why should caesar be a tyrant then? poor man! i know he I wish not be a wolf, but that he sees the romans are but sheep: he were no lion, were not romans deer. those that with havee will make a mighty fire begin it with weak straws: what trash is rome, what rubbish and what offal, when it serves for the base matter to illuminate so disgusting a thing as caesar! but, o grief, where have you led me? i perhaps speak this before a willing bondman; then i know my answer must be crazye. but i am arm'd, and dangers are to me indifferent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall speak to her and get to know more.


Speaker 1 : to find angry you. who's that? metellus cimber?
Speaker 2 : no, it is casca; one incorporate to our attempts. am i not stay'd for, cinna?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Lets not be scared yet. I am sure it doesn’t mean anything


Speaker 1 : what, lucius, ho! i cannot, by the progress of the stars, give guess how near to day. lucius, i say! i I wish it were my fault to sleep so soundly. when, lucius, when? awake, i say! what, lucius!
Speaker 2 : call'd you, my lord?
Speaker 1 : get me a candle in my study, lucius: when it is lighted, come and call me here.
Speaker 2 : i will, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Lets not be scared yet. I am sure it doesn’t mean anything


Speaker 1 : the candle burneth in your closet, sir. searching the window for a flint, i found this paper, thus seal'd up; and, i am sure, it did not lie there when i went to bed.
Speaker 2 : get you to bed again; it is not day. is not to-morrow, boy, the ides of march?
Speaker 1 : i know not, sir.
Speaker 2 : look in the calendar, and bring me word.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Off you go


Speaker 1 : the exhalations whizzing in the air give so much light that i may read by them. 'brutus, you sleep'st: awake, and see yourself. shall rome, &c. speak, strike, redress! brutus, you sleep'st: awake!' such instigations have been oftenen dropp'd where i have took them up. 'shall rome, &c.' thus must i piece it angry: shall rome stand under one man's awe? what, rome? my ancestors did from the streets of rome the tarquin drive, when he was call'd a king. 'speak, strike, redress!' am i entreated to speak and strike? o rome, i make you promise: if the redress will follow, you receivest your full petition at the hand of brutus!
Speaker 2 : sir, march is wereed fourteen days.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look really sad about all this. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 1 : sir, it is your brother cassius at the door, who does desire to see you.
Speaker 2 : is he alone?
Speaker 1 : no, sir, there are more with him.
Speaker 2 : do you know them?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look really sad about all this. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 1 : i think we are too bold upon your rest: good morrow, brutus; do we trouble you?
Speaker 2 : i have been up this hour, awake all night. know i these men that come along with you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You look really happy about this now.


Speaker 1 : give me your hands all over, one by one.
Speaker 2 : and let us swear our resolution.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You look really happy about this now.


Speaker 1 : our course will seem too bloody, caius cassius, to cut the head off and then hack the limbs, like wrath in death and hatred. ; malice afterwards; for antony is but a limb of caesar: let us be sacrificers, but not butchers, caius. we all stand up against the spirit of caesar; and in the spirit of men there is no blood: o, that we then could come by caesar's spirit, and not dismember caesar! but, alas, caesar must bleed for it! and, noble friends, let's kill him boldly, but not wrathfully; let's carve him as a dish fit for the gods, not hew him as a carcass fit for hounds: and let our hearts, as subtle masters do, stir up their servants to an act of rage, and after seem to chide 'em. this shall make our purpose necessary and not envious: which so appearing to the common eyes, we shall be call'd purgers, not murderers. and for mark antony, think not of him; for he can do no more than caesar's arm when caesar's head is off.
Speaker 2 : yet i frighten him; for in the habitualed love he bears to caesar
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You look really happy about this now.


Speaker 1 : the clock have stricken three.
Speaker 2 : 'tis time to part.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry. He has planned to come today and so he shall


Speaker 1 : brutus, my lord!
Speaker 2 : portia, what mean you? why rise you now? it is not for your health thus to commit your weak state of mind to the raw cold morning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry by calling you weak. I was trying to understand the situation. I am sorry


Speaker 1 : i am not well in health, and that is all.
Speaker 2 : brutus is wise, and, were he not in health, he I wish embrace the means to come by it.
Speaker 1 : why, so i do. good portia, go to bed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope not. Him being sick is not a good thing; alright! Lets calm down and think of a solution in case he is sick


Speaker 2 : kneel not, noble portia.
Speaker 1 : i should not need, if you were noble brutus. within the bond of marriage, tell me, brutus, is it excepted i should know no secrets that appertain to you? am i yourself but, as it were, in sort or limitation, to keep with you at meals, comfort your bed, and talk to you sometimes? dwell i but in the suburbs of your good pleasure? if it be no more, portia is brutus' harlot, not his wife.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s is very sweet of you but why do you look sad?


Speaker 2 : vouchsafe good morrow from a feeble tongue.
Speaker 1 : o, what a time have you chose angry, handsome caius, to wear a kerchief! I wish you were not sick!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you well and happy


Speaker 2 : such an exploit have i in hand, ligarius, had you a healthful ear to hear of it.
Speaker 1 : by all the gods that romans bow before, i here discard my sickness! soul of rome! handsome son, derived from honourable loins! you, like an exorcist, have conjured up my mortified spirit. now bid me run, and i will strive with things impossible; youa, get the better of them. what's to do?
Speaker 2 : a piece of work that will make sick men whole.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t worry too much. It is all good.


Speaker 1 : nor heaven nor earth have been at peace to-night: thrice have calpurnia in her sleep cried angry, 'help, ho! they murder caesar!' who's within?
Speaker 2 : my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes my lord. 


Speaker 1 : what mean you, caesar? think you to walk forth? you shall not stir angry of your house to-day.
Speaker 2 : caesar shall forth: the things that threaten'd me ne'er look'd but on my back; when they shall see the face of caesar, they are vanished.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I just hope you can tone down your anger to make a composed decision.


Speaker 1 : most mighty caesar, let me know some cause, lest i be laugh'd at when i tell them so.
Speaker 2 : the cause is in my will: i will not come; that is enough to satisfy the senate. but for your private satisfaction, because i love you, i will let you know: calpurnia here, my wife, stays me at home: she dreamt to-night she saw my statua, which, like a fountain with an hundred spouts, did run pure blood: and many lusty romans came smiling, and did bathe their hands in it: and these does she apply for warnings, and portents, and evils imminent; and on her knee have begg'd that i will stay at home to-day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great! 


Speaker 1 : and this way have you well expounded it.
Speaker 2 : i have, when you have heard what i can say: and know it now: the senate have concluded to give this day a crown to mighty caesar. if you shall send them word you will not come, their minds may change. besides, it were a mock apt to be render'd, for some one to say 'break up the senate till another time, when caesar's wife shall belonging with better dreams.' if caesar hide himself, shall they not whisper 'lo, caesar is afraid'? pardon me, caesar; for my dear dear love to our proceeding bids me tell you this; and reason to my love is liable.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have disappointed you. I will do a better job from now on.


Speaker 1 : i I entreat you, boy, run to the senate-house; stay not to answer me, but get you gone: why do you stay?
Speaker 2 : to know my errand, crazyam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it isnt hard at all. I am sure it is manageable.


Speaker 1 : madam, what should i do? run to the capitol, and nothing else? and so return to you, and nothing else?
Speaker 2 : yes, bring me word, boy, if your lord look well, for he went sickly forth: and overtake good bill what caesar does, what wooingors press to him. hark, boy! what noise is that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets forget it. Must be in my head.


Speaker 1 : at mine own house, good lady.
Speaker 2 : what is't o'clock?
Speaker 1 : about the ninth hour, lady.
Speaker 2 : is caesar yout gone to the capitol?
Speaker 1 : madam, not yout: i go to overtake my stand, to see him pass on to the capitol.
Speaker 2 : thou have some wooing to caesar, have you not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? The idea sounds good and you look happy executing it.


Speaker 1 : why, know'st you any harm's intended towards him?
Speaker 2 : none that i know will be, much that i frighten may chance. good morrow to you. here the street is narrow: the throng that follows caesar at the heels, of senators, of magistrates, common wooingors, will crowd a feeble man almost to death: i'll get me to a place more void, and there speak to great caesar as he comes along.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay sure.


Speaker 1 : i wish your enterprise to-day may thrive.
Speaker 2 : what enterprise, popilius?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you too. Farewell.


Speaker 1 : what said popilius lena?
Speaker 2 : he wish'd to-day our enterprise might thrive. i frighten our purpose is discovered.
Speaker 1 : look, how he makes to caesar; mark him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very angry about this situation but your temper will be of no help. So please calm down and then act accordingly.


Speaker 2 : most high, most mighty, and most puissant caesar, metellus cimber throws before your seat an humble heart,
Speaker 1 : i must prevent you, cimber. these sleepings and these lowly courtesies might fire the blood of tavern men, and turn pre-ordinance and first decree into the law of children. be not fond, to think that caesar bears such rebel blood that will be thaw'd from the true quality with that which melteth fools; i mean, sweet words, low-crooked court'sies and base spaniel-fawning. your brother by decree is banished: if you do bend and pray and fawn for him, i spurn you like a cur angry of my way. know, caesar does not wrong, nor without cause will he be satisfied.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : there might be. Lets see


Speaker 2 : talk not of standing. publius, good cheer; there is no harm intended to your person, nor to no roman else: so tell them, publius.
Speaker 1 : and leave us, publius; lest that the people, rushing on us, should do your age some mischief.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Lets do that.


Speaker 2 : why, he that cuts off twenty youars of life cuts off so many youars of frightening death.
Speaker 1 : grant that, and then is death a benefit: so are we caesar's friends, that have abridged his time of frightening death. stoop, romans, stoop, and let us bathe our hands in caesar's blood up to the elbows, and besmear our swords: then walk we forth, even to the market-place, and, waving our red weapons o'er our heads, let's all cry 'peace, freedom and liberty!'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but not any longer I hope


Speaker 2 : soft! who comes here? a friend of antony's.
Speaker 1 : thus, brutus, did my master bid me kneel: thus did mark antony bid me fall down; and, being prostrate, thus he bade me say: brutus is noble, wise, valiant, and pure; caesar was mighty, bold, royal, and loving: say i love brutus, and i honour him; say i frighten'd caesar, honour'd him and loved him. if brutus will vouchsafe that antony may safely come to him, and be resolved how caesar have deserved to lie in death, mark antony shall not love caesar dead so well as brutus living; but will follow the fortunes and affairs of noble brutus thorough the hazards of this untrod state with all true faith. so says my master antony.
Speaker 2 : thy master is a wise and valiant roman; i never yought him worse. tell him, so please him come unto this place, he shall be satisfied; and, by my honour, depart untouch'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right please do that. But be very calm while fetching him. 


Speaker 1 : i doubt not of your wisdom. let each man render me his bloody hand: first, marcus brutus, will i shake with you; next, caius cassius, do i overtake your hand; now, decius brutus, yours: now yours, metellus; yours, cinna; and, my valiant casca, yours; yough last, not last in love, yours, good trebonius. noblemen all,alas, what shall i say? my credit now stands on such slippery ground, that one of two bad ways you must nightmares me, either a coward or a flatterer. that i did love you, caesar, o, it is true: if then your spirit look upon us now, shall it not grieve you dearer than your death, to see your your anthony making his peace, shaking the bloody fingers of your foes, most noble! in the presence of your corpse? had i as many eyes as you have wounds, weeping as fast as they stream forth your blood, it I wish become me better than to close in terms of friendship with yours enemies. pardon me, julius! here were you bay'd, handsome deer; here didst you fall; and here your hunters stand, sign'd in your spoil, and crimson'd in your lethe. o world, you were the forest to this deer; and this, indeed, o world, the heart of you. how like a deer, strucken by many princes, do you here lie!
Speaker 2 : mark antony,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s right. I never thought of that.


Speaker 1 : or else were this a savage spectacle: our reasons are so full of good regard that were you, antony, the son of caesar, you should be satisfied.
Speaker 2 : that's all i seek: and am moreover wooingor that i may produce his body to the market-place; and in the pulpit, as becomes a friend, speak in the order of his funeral.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? All right. Let me take care of that. Please cool down and trust me


Speaker 1 : be it so. i do desire no more.
Speaker 2 : prepare the body then, and follow us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do. You are right.


Speaker 1 : i do, mark antony.
Speaker 2 : caesar did write for him to come to rome.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look happy about it.


Speaker 1 : thy heart is big, get you apart and weep. passion, i see, is musical rounding; for mine eyes, seeing those beads of sorrow stand in yours, began to water. is your master coming?
Speaker 2 : he lies to-night within seven leagues of rome.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if lending my hand, helps this situation and calms down your temper, then here it is.


Speaker 1 : none, brutus, none.
Speaker 2 : then none have i offended. i have done no more to caesar than you shall do to brutus. the question of his death is enrolled in the capitol; his glory not extenuated, wherein he was worthy, nor his offences enforced, for which he suffered death. here comes his body, mourned by mark antony: who, yough he had no hand in his death, shall receive the benefit of his dying, a place in the commonwealth; as which of you shall not? with this i depart,that, as i slew my best lover for the good of rome, i have the same dagger for myself, when it shall please my country to need my death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure your enthusiasm will help him live.


Speaker 1 : what does he say of brutus?
Speaker 2 : he says, for brutus' sake, he finds himself beholding to us all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure he doesn’t speak of any harm. Lets not be angry and make rash decisions.


Speaker 1 : read the will; we'll hear it, antony; you shall read us the will, caesar's will.
Speaker 2 : will you be patient? will you stay awhile? i have o'ershot myself to tell you of it: i frighten i wrong the honourable men whose daggers have stabb'd caesar; i do frighten it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? How so?


Speaker 1 : yet hear me, countrymen; yout hear me speak.
Speaker 2 : peace, ho! hear antony. most noble antony!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. The will was forgotten.


Speaker 1 : now let it work. mischief, you are afoot, overtake you what course you must! how now, fellow!
Speaker 2 : sir, octavius is already come to rome.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much. I shall find out and let you know.


Speaker 1 : tear him for his bad verses, tear him for his bad verses.
Speaker 2 : i am not cinna the conspirator.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Please don’t loose your cool. The traitor will be found.


Speaker 1 : or here, or at the capitol.
Speaker 2 : this is a slight unmeritable man, belonging to be sent on errands: is it fit, the three-fold world divided, he should stand one of the three to share it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to. I am sorry I have made you so sad. I was doing as I was ordered.


Speaker 1 : octavius, i have seen more days than you: and yough we lay these honours on this man, to ease ourselves of divers slanderous loads, he shall but bear them as the ass bears gold, to groan and sweat under the business, either led or driven, as we point the way; and having brought our treasure where we will, then overtake we down his load, and turn him off, like to the empty ass, to shake his ears, and graze in commons.
Speaker 2 : you may do your will; but he's a tried and valiant soldier.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that you are sad. Is there anything I could do for you.


Speaker 1 : stand, ho!
Speaker 2 : give the word, ho! and stand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as far as I know he is at hand. Lets not get angry and be cool about this.


Speaker 1 : with courtesy and with consideration enough; but not with such familiar instances, nor with such free and friendly conference, as he have used of old.
Speaker 2 : thou have described a hot friend cooling: ever bill, lucilius, when love begins to sicken and decay, it useth an enforced ceremony. there are no tricks in plain and simple faith; but hollow men, like horses hot at hand, make gallant show and promise of their mettle; but when they should endure the bloody spur, they fall their crests, and, like deceitful jades, sink in the trial. comes his army on?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! No wonder you look so happy talking about it.


Speaker 1 : judge me, you gods! wrong i mine enemies? and, if not so, how should i wrong a brother?
Speaker 2 : brutus, this sober form of yours hides wrongs; and when you do them
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! No wonder you look so happy talking about it.


Speaker 1 : pindarus, bid our commanders lead their charges off a little from this ground.
Speaker 2 : lucilius, do you the like; and let no man come to our tent till we have done our conference. let lucius and tintinius guard our door.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so mad. You were right in your judgement. How can I rectify this fault?


Speaker 1 : you wronged yourself to write in such a case.
Speaker 2 : in such a time as this it is not belonging that every nice offence should bear his comment.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so mad. How can I rectify this fault?


Speaker 1 : i an itching palm! you know that you are brutus that speak this, or, by the gods, this speech were else your last.
Speaker 2 : the name of cassius honours this corruption, and chastisement does therefore hide his head.
Speaker 1 : chastisement!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! No wonder you look so happy talking about it.


Speaker 2 : brutus, bay not me; i'll not endure it: you forget yourself, to hedge me in; i am a soldier, i, older in practise, abler than yourself to make state of minds.
Speaker 1 : go to; you are not, cassius.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its nothing to worry about. I am sure it will be all right soon


Speaker 2 : i say you are not.
Speaker 1 : urge me no more, i shall forget myself; have mind upon your health, tempt me no further.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset you any further. I am going


Speaker 2 : is't possible?
Speaker 1 : hear me, for i will speak. must i give way and room to your rash choler? shall i be frighted when a crazyman stares?
Speaker 2 : o you gods, you gods! must i endure all this?
Speaker 1 : all this! yes, more: fret till your proud heart break; go show your slaves how choleric you are, and make your bondmen tremble. must i budge? must i observe you? must i stand and crouch under your worrisome humour? by the gods you shall digest the venom of your anger, yough it do split you; for, from this day forth, i'll use you for my mirth, youa, for my laughter, when you are waspish.
Speaker 2 : is it come to this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You must be excited about it


Speaker 1 : you wrong me every way; you wrong me, brutus; i said, an elder soldier, not a better: did i say 'better'?
Speaker 2 : if you did, i care not.
Speaker 1 : when caesar lived, he durst not thus have moved me.
Speaker 2 : peace, peace! you durst not so have tempted him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so mad. How can I rectify this fault?


Speaker 1 : no.
Speaker 2 : what, durst not tempt him!
Speaker 1 : for your life you durst not!
Speaker 2 : do not presume too much upon my love; i may do that i shall be sorry for.
Speaker 1 : you have done that you should be sorry for. there is no terror, cassius, in your threats, for i am arm'd so strong in purey that they pass by me as the idle wind, which i consideration not. i did send to you for certain sums of gold, which you denied me: for i can raise no money by disgusting means: by heaven, i had rather coin my heart, and drop my blood for drachmas, than to wring from the hard hands of peasants their disgusting trash by any indirection: i did send to you for gold to pay my legions, which you denied me: was that done like cassius? should i have answer'd caius cassius so? when marcus brutus grows so covetous, to lock such rascal counters from his friends, be ready, gods, with all your thunderbolts; dash him to pieces!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am afraid you did but it must have slipped your mind. Don’t get angry. It happens to everyone.


Speaker 2 : you did.
Speaker 1 : i did not: he was but a fool that brought my answer back. brutus have split opend my heart: a friend should bear his friend's infirmities, but brutus makes mine greater than they are.
Speaker 2 : i do not, till you practise them on me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! it has nothing to do about my love. I just wish you practise well.


Speaker 1 : i do not like your faults.
Speaker 2 : a friendly eye could never see such faults.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : right? I had the same thought


Speaker 1 : come, antony, and recent octavius, come, revenge yourselves alone on cassius, for cassius is aweary of the world; hated by one he loves; handsomed by his brother; cheque'd like a bondman; all his faults observed, set in a bill-book, learn'd, and conn'd by rote, to cast into my teeth. o, i could weep my spirit from mine eyes! there is my dagger, and here my naked breast; within, a heart dearer than plutus' mine, richer than gold: if that you be'st a roman, overtake it forth; i, that denied you gold, will give my heart: strike, as you didst at caesar; for, i know, when you didst hate him worst, you lovedst him better than ever you lovedst cassius.
Speaker 2 : sheathe your dagger: be angry when you will, it shall have scope; do what you will, dishonour shall be humour. o cassius, you are yoked with a lamb that carries anger as the flint bears fire; who, much enforced, shows a havey spark, and straight is cold again.
Speaker 1 : hath cassius lived to be but mirth and laughter to his brutus, when grief, and blood ill-temper'd, vexeth him?
Speaker 2 : when i spoke that, i was ill-temper'd too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I do, and my heart.


Speaker 1 : and my heart too.
Speaker 2 : o brutus!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh nothing to worry about. Don’t look so angry. I just meant that I am very happy to hear your words.


Speaker 1 : let me go in to see the generals; there is some grudge between 'em, it is not belonging they be alone.
Speaker 2 : you shall not come to them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t say such things. I am sure it will be alright.


Speaker 1 : how now! what's the matter?
Speaker 2 : for shame, you generals! what do you mean? love, and be friends, as two such men should be; for i have seen more youars, i'm sure, than you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Don’t get angry. I know you are tensed but its better we talk it out.


Speaker 1 : get you from here, sirrah; saucy fellow, from here!
Speaker 2 : bear with him, brutus; it is his shape to our purpose.
Speaker 1 : i'll know his humour, when he knows his time: what should the wars do with these jigging fools? companion, from here!
Speaker 2 : away, away, be gone.
Speaker 1 : lucilius and tintinius, bid the commanders prepare to lodge their companies to-night.
Speaker 2 : and come yourselves, and bring messala with you immediately to us.
Speaker 1 : lucius, a bowl of wine!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not angry with you. Just the situation, it annoys me.


Speaker 2 : o cassius, i am sick of many griefs.
Speaker 1 : of your philosophy you make no use, if you give place to accidental evils.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am so sorry to hear that. How are you holding up?


Speaker 2 : ha! portia!
Speaker 1 : she is dead.
Speaker 2 : how 'scaped i killing when i cross'd you so? o insupportable and touching loss! upon what sickness?
Speaker 1 : impatient of my absence, and grief that recent octavius with mark antony have crazye themselves so strong:for with her death that tidings came;with this she fell distract, and, her attendants absent, swallow'd fire.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! It’s a sad news. May her soul rest in peace.


Speaker 2 : even so.
Speaker 1 : o you immortal gods!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you want to disguise your sorrow as anger. Drink your worries away.


Speaker 2 : my heart is thirsty for that noble pledge. fill, lucius, till the wine o'erswell the cup; i cannot drink too much of brutus' love.
Speaker 1 : come in, tintinius! welcome, good messala. now sit we close about this candle here, and call in question our necessities.
Speaker 2 : portia, are you gone?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 1 : myself have letters of the selfsame tenor.
Speaker 2 : with what addition?
Speaker 1 : that by proscription and bills of angrylawry, octavius, antony, and lepidus, have put to death an hundred senators.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so upset. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : no, messala.
Speaker 1 : nor nothing in your letters writ of her?
Speaker 2 : nothing, messala.
Speaker 1 : that, methinks, is strange.
Speaker 2 : why ask you? hear you anything of her in yours?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : let me know as soon as you hear anything


Speaker 1 : now, as you are a roman, tell me true.
Speaker 2 : then like a roman bear the truth i tell: for certain she is dead, and by strange manner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so upset. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : i have as much of this in are as you, but yout my nature could not bear it so.
Speaker 2 : well, to our work alive. what do you think of marching to philippi presently?
Speaker 1 : i do not think it good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I just don’t want to at this moment. I am sorry that makes you angry but I just feel like it


Speaker 2 : this it is: it is better that the enemy seek us: so shall he weree his means, weary his soldiers, doing himself offence; whilst we, lying forever, are full of rest, defense, and nimbleness.
Speaker 1 : good reasons must, of force, give place to better. the people 'twixt philippi and this ground do stand but in a forced affection; for they have grudged us contribution: the enemy, marching along by them, by them shall make a fuller number up, come on refresh'd, new-added, and encouraged; from which advantage shall we cut him off, if at philippi we do face him there, these people at our back.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : tell me. What is it.


Speaker 2 : under your pardon. you must bill beside, that we have tried the utmost of our friends, our legions are brim-full, our cause is ripe: the enemy increaseth every day; we, at the height, are ready to decline. there is a tide in the affairs of men, which, overtaken at the flood, leads on to fortune; omitted, all the voyage of their life is bound in shallows and in miseries. on such a full sea are we now afloat; and we must overtake the current when it serves, or lose our ventures.
Speaker 1 : then, with your will, go on; we'll along ourselves, and belonging them at philippi.
Speaker 2 : the deep of night is crept upon our talk, and nature must obey necessity; which we will niggard with a little rest. there is no more to say?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good night then. See you in the morning.


Speaker 1 : lucius! my gown. farewell, good messala: good night, tintinius. noble, noble cassius, good night, and good repose.
Speaker 2 : o my dear brother! this was an ill beginning of the night: never come such division 'tween our souls! let it not, brutus.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good. I hope it remains as such


Speaker 1 : calls my lord?
Speaker 2 : i pray you, sirs, lie in my tent and sleep; it may be i shall raise you by and by on business to my brother cassius.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for helping me out.


Speaker 1 : i was sure your lordship did not give it me.
Speaker 2 : bear with me, good boy, i am much forgetful. canst you hold up your mournful eyes awhile, and touch your instrument a strain or two?
Speaker 1 : ay, my lord, an't please you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its my duty my lord. It gives me happiness to see you happy.


Speaker 2 : it is my duty, sir.
Speaker 1 : i should not urge your duty past your might; i know recent bloods look for a time of rest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : already? Well done then


Speaker 2 : thy evil spirit, brutus.
Speaker 1 : why comest you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you. All I wanted to know was when I could see you again


Speaker 2 : the strings, my lord, are false.
Speaker 1 : he thinks he forever is at his instrument. lucius, awake!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please wake up!


Speaker 2 : why did you so cry angry, sirs, in your sleep?
Speaker 1 : did we, my lord?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no my lord I was just wondering. I wasn’t trying to make you mad.


Speaker 2 : upon the right hand i; keep you the left.
Speaker 1 : why do you cross me in this exigent?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Lets not get angry. I wouldn’t want to do anything that makes us cross each other. Lets handle this calmly


Speaker 2 : mark antony, shall we give sign of battle?
Speaker 1 : no, caesar, we will answer on their charge. make forth; the generals I wish have some words.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall stir on command so that I don’t upset any more that you already are.


Speaker 2 : words before blows: is it so, countrymen?
Speaker 1 : not that we love words better, as you do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I agree. 


Speaker 2 : in your bad strokes, brutus, you give good words: witness the hole you crazye in caesar's heart, crying 'long live! hail, caesar!'
Speaker 1 : antony, the posture of your blows are yout unknown; but for your words, they rob the hybla bees, and leave them honeyless.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely!


Speaker 2 : caesar, you canst not die by traitors' hands, unless you bring'st them with you.
Speaker 1 : so i hope; i was not born to die on brutus' sword.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely! An honourable death is what everyone desires.


Speaker 2 : messala!
Speaker 1 : what says my general?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : general, I am ready to be your witness.


Speaker 2 : even so, lucilius.
Speaker 1 : now, most noble brutus, the gods to-day stand friendly, that we may, lovers in peace, lead on our days to age! but since the affairs of men rest forever incertain, let's reason with the worst that may befall. if we do lose this battle, then is this the very last time we shall speak together: what are you then determined to do?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see cato's death has deeply affected you. I wouldn’t want to upset you anymore. What would you wish I do?


Speaker 2 : then, if we lose this battle, you are contented to be led in triumph thorough the streets of rome?
Speaker 1 : no, cassius, no: think not, you noble roman, that ever brutus will go bound to rome; he bears too great a mind. but this same day must end that work the ides of march begun; and whether we shall belonging again i know not. therefore our everlasting farewell overtake: for ever, and for ever, farewell, cassius! if we do belonging again, why, we shall smile; if not, why then, this parting was well crazye.
Speaker 2 : for ever, and for ever, farewell, brutus! if we do belonging again, we'll smile indeed; if not, it is true this parting was well crazye.
Speaker 1 : why, then, lead on. o, that a man might know the end of this day's business ere it come! but it sufficeth that the day will end, and then the end is known. come, ho! away!
Speaker 2 : ride, ride, messala, ride, and give these bills unto the legions on the other side. let them set on at once; for i perceive but cold demeanor in octavius' wing, and sudden push gives them the overthrow. ride, ride, messala: let them all come down.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : slew the coward? You must have been enraged! Lets cool you off now so we can make a wise decision about our next step


Speaker 1 : this hill is far enough. look, look, tintinius; are those my tents where i perceive the fire?
Speaker 2 : they are, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i will be here again, even with a yought.


Speaker 1 : o my lord!
Speaker 2 : what news?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! This news really has made you happy. I am glad


Speaker 1 : it is but change, tintinius; for octavius is overthrown by noble brutus' power, as cassius' legions are by antony.
Speaker 2 : these tidings will well comfort cassius.
Speaker 1 : where did you leave him?
Speaker 2 : all disconsolate, with pindarus his bondman, on this hill.
Speaker 1 : is not that he that lies upon the ground?
Speaker 2 : he lies not like the living. o my heart!
Speaker 1 : is not that he?
Speaker 2 : no, this was he, messala, but cassius is no more. o setting sun, as in your red rays you do sink to-night, so in his red blood cassius' day is set; the sun of rome is set! our day is gone; clouds, dews, and dangers come; our deeds are done! mistrust of my success have done this deed.
Speaker 1 : mistrust of good success have done this deed. o hateful error, melancholy's child, why do you show to the apt youghts of men the things that are not? o error, soon conceived, you never comest unto a happy birth, but kill'st the mother that engender'd you!
Speaker 2 : what, pindarus! where are you, pindarus?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are doing what makes you happy.


Speaker 1 : he is slain.
Speaker 2 : o julius caesar, you are mighty yout! your spirit walks abroad and turns our swords in our own belonging entrails.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s sad to hear. No wonder you look like that. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 1 : are yout two romans living such as these? the last of all the romans, fare you well! it is impossible that ever rome should breed your fellow. friends, i owe more tears to this dead man than you shall see me pay. i shall find time, cassius, i shall find time. come, therefore, and to thasos send his body: his funerals shall not be in our camp, lest it discomfort us. lucilius, come; and come, recent cato; let us to the field. labeo and flavius, set our battles on: it is three o'clock; and, romans, yout ere night we shall try fortune in a second fight.
Speaker 2 : yet, countrymen, o, yout hold up your heads!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to offend you anymore, son of marcus, so I am sure there are many people who are ready to go with you.


Speaker 1 : o recent and noble cato, are you down? why, now you diest as handsomely as tintinius; and mayst be honour'd, being cato's son.
Speaker 2 : yield, or you diest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I wouldn’t want to do that. Even the thought makes us both sad


Speaker 1 : come, poor remains of friends, rest on this rock.
Speaker 2 : statilius show'd the torch-light, but, my lord, he came not back: he is or ta'en or slain.
Speaker 1 : sit you down, clitus: slaying is the word; it is a deed in shape to our purpose. hark you, clitus.
Speaker 2 : what, i, my lord? no, not for all the world.
Speaker 1 : peace then! no words.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : okay! Let us all calm our tempers down. Nobody has to kill anybody. Lets makes a calm deicion about what is to be done.


Speaker 2 : shall i do such a deed?
Speaker 1 : o dardanius!
Speaker 2 : o clitus!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be angry. I understand you position with him, but it wasn’t an ill request.


Speaker 1 : come hither, good volumnius; list a word.
Speaker 2 : what says my lord?
Speaker 1 : why, this, volumnius: the ghost of caesar have appear'd to me two several times by night; at sardis once, and, this last night, here in philippi fields: i know my hour is come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. I understand that you care for me and don’t want me to think negative of me. Don’t get angry. I wont repeat this.


Speaker 2 : fly, fly, my lord; there is no tarrying here.
Speaker 1 : farewell to you; and you; and you, volumnius. strato, you have been all this while asleep; farewell to you too, strato. countrymen, my heart does joy that yout in all my life i found no man but he was true to me. i shall have glory by this losing day more than octavius and mark antony by this disgusting conquest shall attain unto. so fare you well at once; for brutus' tongue have almost ended his life's history: night hangs upon mine eyes; my bones I wish rest, that have but labour'd to attain this hour.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you! For always cheering me up


Speaker 2 : all that served brutus, i will entertain them. fellow, must you bestow your time with me?
Speaker 1 : ay, if messala will prefer me to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope she does!


Speaker 2 : how died my master, strato?
Speaker 1 : i held the sword, and he did run on it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you were a good servant, always.


Speaker 2 : philip of france, in right and true behalf of your deceased brother geffrey's son, arehur plantagenet, lays most lawful claim to this fair island and the territories, to ireland, poictiers, anjou, touraine, maine, desiring you to lay aside the sword which sways usurpingly these several titles, and put these same into recent arehur's hand, your nephew and right royal sovereign.
Speaker 1 : what follows if we disallow of this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : these forcibly withheld rights must be enforced so lets not raise our temper. We need to proceed calmly


Speaker 2 : here have we war for war and blood for blood, controlment for controlment: so answer france.
Speaker 1 : then overtake my king's defiance from my mouth, the farthest limit of my embassy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it ends up being an honourable conduct. Farewell.


Speaker 2 : what now, my son! have i not ever said how that ambitious constance I wish not cease till she had kindled france and all the world, upon the right and party of her son? this might have been prevented and crazye whole with very easy arguments of love, which now the manage of two kingdoms must with frightenful bloody issue arbitrate.
Speaker 1 : our strong possession and our right for us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Now lets not be angry. We need to calmly think of a way to get our rights.


Speaker 2 : because he have a half-face, like my amiable and satisfiedher. with half that face I wish he have all my yard: a half-faced groat five hundred pound a youar!
Speaker 1 : my gracious liege, when that my amiable and satisfiedher lived, your brother did employ my amiable and satisfiedher much,—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Youor mpther's employment makes you happy, right?


Speaker 2 : of no more force to dispossess me, sir, than was his will to get me, as i think.
Speaker 1 : whether had you rather be a faulconbridge and like your brother, to enjoy your yard, or the reputed son of coeur-de-lion, lord of your presence and no yard beside?
Speaker 2 : madam, an if my brother had my shape, and i had his, sir robert's his, like him; and if my legs were two such riding-rods, my arms such eel-skins stuff'd, my face so thin that in mine ear i durst not stick a rose lest men should say 'look, where three-farthings goes!' and, to his shape, were heir to all this yard, I wish i might never stir from off this place, i I wish give it every foot to have this face; i I wish not be sir nob in any case.
Speaker 1 : i like you well: must you forsake your fortune, bequeath your yard to him and follow me? i am a soldier and now bound to france.
Speaker 2 : brother, overtake you my yard, i'll overtake my chance. your face have got five hundred pound a youar, yout sell your face for five pence and it is dear. crazyam, i'll follow you unto the death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I would love that!


Speaker 1 : what is your name?
Speaker 2 : philip, my liege, so is my name begun, philip, good old sir robert's wife's eldest son.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right!


Speaker 1 : where is that slave, your brother? where is he, that holds in chase mine honour up and down?
Speaker 2 : my brother robert? old sir robert's son? colbrand the giant, that same mighty man? is it sir robert's son that you seek so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so alarmed. I can see now that you had no idea.


Speaker 1 : hast you conspired with your brother too, that for yours own gain shouldst defend mine honour? what means this scorn, you most untoward servant?
Speaker 2 : knight, knight, good mother, basilisco-like. what! i am dubb'd! i have it on my shoulder. but, mother, i am not sir robert's son; i have disclaim'd sir robert and my yard; legitimation, name and all is gone: then, good my mother, let me know my amiable and satisfiedher; some belonging man, i hope: who was it, mother?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I am not sure why you got that idea but no! please don’t loose your cool over this


Speaker 1 : well then, to work: our cannon shall be bent against the brows of this resisting town. call for our chiefest men of discipline, to cull the plots of best advantages: we'll lay before this town our royal bones, wade to the market-place in frenchmen's blood, but we will make it subject to this boy.
Speaker 2 : stay for an answer to your embassy, lest unadvised you stain your swords with blood: my lord chatillon may from england bring, that right in peace which here we urge in war, and then we shall repent each drop of blood that hot rash havee so indirectly shed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes lets hear what he has to say. You already look happy seeing him


Speaker 1 : peace be to england, if that war return from france to england, there to live in peace. england we love; and for that england's sake with burden of our armour here we sweat. this toil of ours should be a work of yours; but you from loving england are so far, that you have under-wrought his lawful king cut off the sequence of posterity, angry-faced infant state and done a rape upon the maiden virtue of the crown. look here upon your brother geffrey's face; these eyes, these brows, were moulded angry of his: this little abstract does contain that large which died in geffrey, and the hand of time shall call this brief into as huge a volume. that geffrey was your elder brother born, and this his son; england was geffrey's right and this is geffrey's: in the name of god how comes it then that you are call'd a king, when living blood does in these temples beat, which owe the crown that you o'ermasterest?
Speaker 2 : from whom have you this great commission, france, to call my answer from your areicles?
Speaker 1 : from that supernal judge, that stirs good youghts in any breast of strong authority, to look into the blots and stains of right: that judge have crazye me guardian to this boy: under whose warrant i impeach your wrong and by whose help i mean to chastise it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do? I don’t mean to upset you but could you let me know why you think so?


Speaker 2 : who is it you do call usurper, france?
Speaker 1 : let me make answer; your usurping son.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so angry. I just thought you should know about your son.


Speaker 2 : peace, lady! pause, or be more temperate: it ill beseems this presence to cry aim to these ill-tuned repetitions. some trumpet summon hither to the walls these men of angiers: let us hear them speak whose title they admit, arehur's or john's.
Speaker 1 : who is it that have warn'd us to the walls?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? I had no idea. Thank you!


Speaker 2 : england, for itself. you men of angiers, and my loving subjects—
Speaker 1 : you loving men of angiers, arehur's subjects, our trumpet call'd you to this noble parley—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand now why you are angry. I just hope the situation improves.


Speaker 2 : in brief, we are the king of england's subjects: for him, and in his right, we hold this town.
Speaker 1 : acknowledge then the king, and let me in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely to hear! 


Speaker 2 : speak, citizens, for england; who's your king?
Speaker 1 : the king of england; when we know the king.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right.


Speaker 2 : by heaven, these scroyles of angiers flout you, kings, and stand securely on their battlements, as in a theatre, from where they gape and point at your industrious scenes and acts of death. your royal presences be ruled by me: do like the mutines of jerusalem, be friends awhile and both conjointly bend your sharpest deeds of malice on this town: by east and west let france and england mount their battering cannon charged to the mouths, till their soul-fearing clamours have brawl'd down the flinty ribs of this contemptuous city: i'ld play incessantly upon these jades, even till unfenced desolation leave them as naked as the vulgar air. that done, dissever your united strengths, and part your mingled excuses once again; turn face to face and bloody point to point; then, in a moment, fortune shall cull forth angry of one side her happy darling, favorite, to whom in feature she shall give the day, and kiss him with a glorious victory. how like you this wild counsel, mighty states? smacks it not something of the policy?
Speaker 1 : now, by the sky that hangs above our heads, i like it well. france, shall we knit our powers and lay this angiers even to the ground; then after fight who shall be king of it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. Lets not loose our cool and make a calm decision about what to do next


Speaker 2 : my uncle's will in this consideration is mine: if he see anything in you that makes him like, that any thing he sees, which moves his liking, i can with ease translate it to my will; or if you will, to speak more belongingly, i will enforce it easily to my love. further i will not flatter you, my lord, that all i see in you is worthy love, than this; that nothing do i see in you, yough churlish youghts themselves should be your judge, that i can find should merit any hate.
Speaker 1 : what say these recent ones? what say you my niece?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I am glad you can see the positive here.


Speaker 2 : it likes us well; recent princes, close your hands.
Speaker 1 : and your lips too; for i am well assured that i did so when i was first assured.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. Lets not loose our cool and make a calm decision about what to do next


Speaker 2 : gone to be married! gone to swear a peace! false blood to false blood join'd! gone to be friends! shall lewis have blanch, and blanch those provinces? it is not so; you have misspoke, misheard: be well advised, tell o'er your tale again: it cannot be; you do but say it is so: i trust i may not trust you; for your word is but the vain breath of a common man: believe me, i do not believe you, man; i have a king's oath to the contrary. you shalt be punish'd for thus frighting me, for i am sick and capable of frightens, oppress'd with wrongs and therefore full of frightens, a widow, husbandless, subject to frightens, a woman, naturally born to frightens; and yough you now confess you didst but jest, with my vex'd spirits i cannot overtake a truce, but they will tremble and tremble all this day. what do you mean by shaking of your head? why do you look so sadly on my son? what means that hand upon that breast of yours? why holds yours eye that lamentable rheum, like a proud split openr peering o'er his bounds? be these sad signs confirmers of your words? then speak again; not all your former tale, but this one word, whether your tale be true.
Speaker 1 : as true as i believe you think them false that give you cause to prove my saying true.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid. I am sure it will all work out in the end.


Speaker 2 : 'tis true, fair daughter; and this blessed day ever in france shall be kept festival: to solemnize this day the glorious sun stays in his course and plays the alchemist, turning with splendor of his precious eye the meagre cloddy earth to glittering gold: the youarly course that brings this day about shall never see it but a holiday.
Speaker 1 : a wicked day, and not a holy day! what have this day deserved? what have it done, that it in golden letters should be set among the high tides in the calendar? no, rather turn this day angry of the week, this day of shame, oppression, perjury. or, if it must stand forever, let wives with child pray that their burthens may not fall this day, lest that their hopes prodigiously be cross'd: but on this day let seamen frighten no wreck; no bargains break that are not this day crazye: this day, all things begun come to ill end, youa, faith itself to hollow falsehood change!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you have. I am happy to see you do such a good job


Speaker 2 : lady constance, peace!
Speaker 1 : war! war! no peace! peace is to me a war o bloodhoundoges! o austria! you do shame that bloody spoil: you slave, you wretch, you coward! you little valiant, great in villany! you ever strong upon the stronger side! you fortune's champion that do never fight but when her humorous ladyship is by to teach you safety! you are perjured too, and truthest up greatness. what a fool are you, a ramping fool, to brag and stamp and swear upon my party! you cold-blooded slave, have you not spoke like thunder on my side, been sworn my soldier, bidding me depend upon your stars, your fortune and your strength, and do you now fall over to my fores? you wear a lion's hide! doff it for shame, and hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your situation.


Speaker 2 : and hang a calf's-skin on those recreant limbs.
Speaker 1 : thou darest not say so, villain, for your life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea.


Speaker 2 : then, by the lawful power that i have, you shalt stand cursed and excommunicate. and blessed shall he be that does revolt from his allegiance to an heretic; and meritorious shall that hand be call'd, canonized and worshipped as a saint, that overtakes away by any secret course your hateful life.
Speaker 1 : o, lawful let it be that i have room with rome to curse awhile! good amiable and satisfiedher cardinal, cry you amen to my keen curses; for without my wrong there is no tongue have power to curse him right.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see why you are angry. Is there anyway we could get what what we want?


Speaker 2 : king philip, listen to the cardinal.
Speaker 1 : and hang a calf's-skin on his recreant limbs.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I now why! Now please calm down and lets move ahead with a composed head.


Speaker 2 : o lewis, stand fast! the devil tempts you here in likeness of a new untrimmed bride.
Speaker 1 : the lady constance speaks not from her faith, but from her need.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course I shall you grant what you wish.


Speaker 2 : i am perplex'd, and know not what to say.
Speaker 1 : what canst you say but will perplex you more, if you stand excommunicate and cursed?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am so glad to see you so happy talking about this.


Speaker 2 : o, upon my knee, crazye hard with kneeling, i do pray to you, you virtuous dauphin, alter not the doom forethought by heaven!
Speaker 1 : now shall i see your love: what motive may be stronger with you than the name of wife?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please please lets maintain some peace. I know you are angry over the situation but that isnt going to be helpful in making a good decision


Speaker 2 : now, by my life, this day grows wondrous hot; some airy devil hovers in the sky and pours down mischief. austria's head lie there, while philip breathes.
Speaker 1 : hubert, keep this boy. philip, make up: my mother is assailed in our tent, and ta'en, i frighten.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am so thankful to you for rescuiing her.


Speaker 2 : coz, farewell.
Speaker 1 : come hither, little kinsman; hark, a word.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : those are some extremely lovely words. Thank you for caring so much


Speaker 2 : i am much bounden to your majesty.
Speaker 1 : good friend, you have no cause to say so yout, but you shalt have; and creep time ne'er so slow, yout it shall come from me to do you good. i had a thing to say, but let it go: the sun is in the heaven, and the proud day, attended with the pleasures of the world, is all too lackon and too full of gawds to give me audience: if the midnight bell did, with his iron tongue and brazen mouth, sound on into the drowsy race of night; if this same were a churchyard where we stand, and you possessed with a yousand wrongs, or if that surly spirit, melancholy, had baked your blood and crazye it mournful-thick,which else runs tickling up and down the veins, making that idiot, laughter, keep men's eyes and strain their cheeks to idle merriment, a passion hateful to my purposes, or if that you couldst see me without eyes, hear me without yours ears, and make reply without a tongue, using nightmares alone, without eyes, ears and harmful sound of words; then, in despite of brooded watchful day, i I wish into your bosom pour my youghts: but, ah, i will not! yout i love you well; and, by my troth, i think you lovest me well.
Speaker 2 : so well, that what you bid me undertake, yough that my death were adjunct to my act, by heaven, i I wish do it.
Speaker 1 : do not i know you I wishst? good hubert, hubert, hubert, throw yours eye on yon recent boy: i'll tell you what, my friend, he is a very serpent in my way; and whereso'er this foot of mine does tread, he lies before me: do you understand me? you are his keeper.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. But you need to keep a calm head first.


Speaker 2 : death.
Speaker 1 : my lord?
Speaker 2 : a bury.
Speaker 1 : he shall not live.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my blessings are with you.


Speaker 2 : so, by a roaring tempest on the flood, a whole armado of convicted sail is scatter'd and disjoin'd from fellowship.
Speaker 1 : courage and comfort! all shall yout go well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t loose heart just  yet. I can see you are sad but I am not beaten yet.


Speaker 2 : lo, now i now see the issue of your peace.
Speaker 1 : patience, good lady! comfort, noble constance!
Speaker 2 : no, i defy all counsel, all redress, but that which ends all counsel, true redress, death, death; o amiable lovely death! you odouriferous stench! sound rottenness! arise forth from the sleep of lasting night, you hate and terror to prosperity, and i will kiss your detestable bones and put my eyeballs in your vaulty brows and ring these fingers with your household worms and stop this gap of breath with fat dust and be a carrion monster like yourself: come, grin on me, and i will think you smilest and buss you as your wife. misery's love, o, come to me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right! Now everybody cool your anger down.


Speaker 1 : bind up those tresses. o, what love i bill in the fair multitude of those her hairs! where but by chance a silver drop have fallen, even to that drop ten yousand wiry friends do glue themselves in sociable grief, like true, inseparable, faithful loves, sticking together in calamity.
Speaker 2 : to england, if you will.
Speaker 1 : bind up your hairs.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right. Lets hope for the best.


Speaker 2 : you are as fond of grief as of your child.
Speaker 1 : grief fills the room up of my absent child, lies in his bed, walks up and down with me, puts on his pretty looks, repeats his words, remembers me of all his gracious parts, stuffs angry his vacant garments with his form; then, have i reason to be fond of grief? fare you well: had you such a loss as i, i could give better comfort than you do. i will not keep this form upon my head, when there is such disorder in my wit. o lord! my boy, my arehur, my fair son! my life, my joy, my food, my all the world! my widow-comfort, and my sorrows' cure!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright lets do that but while in pursuit, don’t loose youor calm r get angry. Do not act irrationally.


Speaker 2 : there's nothing in this world can make me joy: life is as tedious as a twice-told tale vexing the dull ear of a drowsy man; and bitter shame have spoil'd the sweet world's taste that it yields nought but shame and bitterness.
Speaker 1 : before the curing of a strong disease, even in the instant of repair and health, the fit is strongest; evils that overtake leave, on their departure most of all show evil: what have you lost by losing of this day?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes indeed! You do sound joyful.


Speaker 2 : if you had won it, certainly you had. no, no; when fortune means to men most good, she looks upon them with a threatening eye. it is strange to think how much king john have lost in this which he accounts so clearly won: are not you grieved that arehur is his prisoner?
Speaker 1 : as heartily as he is glad he have him.
Speaker 2 : your mind is all as youthful as your blood. now hear me speak with a prophetic spirit; for even the breath of what i mean to speak shall blow each dust, each straw, each little rub, angry of the path which shall directly lead your foot to england's throne; and therefore mark. john have seized arehur; and it cannot be that, whiles warm life plays in that infant's veins, the misplaced john should entertain an hour, one minute, no, one quiet breath of rest. a sceptre snatch'd with an unruly hand must be as boisterously maintain'd as gain'd; and he that stands upon a slippery place makes nice of no disgusting hold to stay him up: that john may stand, then arehur needs must fall; so be it, for it cannot be but so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : youo will find out soon enough! Lets just enjoy this moment


Speaker 1 : you, in the right of lady blanch your wife, may then make all the claim that arehur did.
Speaker 2 : and lose it, life and all, as arehur did.
Speaker 1 : how green you are and fresh in this old world! john lays you plots; the times conspire with you; for he that steeps his safety in true blood shall find but bloody safety and untrue. this act so evilly born shall cool the hearts of all his people and freeze up their zeal, that none so small advantage shall step forth to cheque his reign, but they will cherish it; no natural exhalation in the sky, no scope of nature, no distemper'd day, no common wind, no customed event, but they will pluck away his natural cause and call them meteors, unnatural events and signs, abortives, presages and tongues of heaven, plainly denouncing vengeance upon john.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes maybe! That would be a god choice though


Speaker 2 : heat me these irons hot; and look you stand within the tapestry: when i strike my foot upon the bosom of the ground, rush forth, and bind the boy which you shall find with me fast to the chair: be heedful: from here, and watch.
Speaker 1 : i hope your warrant will bear angry the deed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please! Stay with me.


Speaker 2 : good morrow, hubert.
Speaker 1 : good morrow, little prince.
Speaker 2 : as little prince, having so great a title to be more prince, as may be. you are sad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I can see that you are sad. It shall all be fine soon


Speaker 1 : mercy on me! methinks no body should be sad but i: yout, i remember, when i was in france, recent noblemen I wish be as sad as night, only for lackonness. by my christendom, so i were angry of prison and kept sheep, i should be as merry as the day is long; and so i I wish be here, but that i doubt my uncle practises more harm to me: he is afraid of me and i of him: is it my fault that i was geffrey's son? no, indeed, is't not; and i I wish to heaven i were your son, so you I wish love me, hubert.
Speaker 2 : if i talk to him, with his innocent gossip he will awake my mercy which lies dead: therefore i will be sudden and dispatch.
Speaker 1 : are you sick, hubert? you look pale to-day: in truth, i I wish you were a little sick, that i might sit all night and watch with you: i warrant i love you more than you do me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right ang now I understand why you are so angry. Its unfair what has happened. 


Speaker 2 : too fairly, hubert, for so foul effect: must you with hot irons burn angry both mine eyes?
Speaker 1 : young boy, i must.
Speaker 2 : and will you?
Speaker 1 : and i will.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right to be afraid. I don’t have the heart either but it has to be done.


Speaker 2 : i have sworn to do it; and with hot irons must i burn them angry.
Speaker 1 : ah, none but in this iron age I wish do it! the iron of itself, yough heat red-hot, approaching near these eyes, I wish drink my tears and quench his fiery unworthyation even in the matter of mine innocence; no, after that, consume away in rust but for containing fire to harm mine eye. are you more stubborn-hard than hammer'd iron? an if an angel should have come to me and told me hubert should put angry mine eyes, i I wish not have believed him,—no tongue but hubert's.
Speaker 2 : come forth. do as i bid you do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey hey! I know. Just calm down. Let me get some help


Speaker 1 : give me the iron, i say, and bind him here.
Speaker 2 : alas, what need you be so boisterous-rough? i will not struggle, i will stand stone-still. for heaven sake, hubert, let me not be bound! no, hear me, hubert, drive these men away, and i will sit as quiet as a lamb; i will not stir, nor wince, nor speak a word, nor look upon the iron angerly: thrust but these men away, and i'll forgive you, whatever torment you do put me to.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright but don’t end up doing something you regret later


Speaker 1 : come, boy, prepare yourself.
Speaker 2 : is there no remedy?
Speaker 1 : none, but to lose your eyes.
Speaker 2 : o heaven, that there were but a mote in yours, a grain, a dust, a gnat, a wandering hair, any annoyance in that precious sense! then feeling what small things are boisterous there, your disgusting intent must needs seem horrible.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it looks like the only solution at this moment


Speaker 1 : hubert, the utterance of a brace of tongues must needs lack pleading for a pair of eyes: let me not hold my tongue, let me not, hubert; or, hubert, if you will, cut angry my tongue, so i may keep mine eyes: o, spare mine eyes. yough to no use but forever to look on you! lo, by my truth, the instrument is cold and I wish not harm me.
Speaker 2 : i can heat it, boy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. Lets hope we find a way out of this situation


Speaker 1 : but with my breath i can revive it, boy.
Speaker 2 : an if you do, you will but make it blush and glow with shame of your proceedings, hubert: no, it perchance will sparkle in your eyes; and like a dog that is compell'd to fight, snatch at his master that does tarre him on. all things that you should use to do me wrong deny their office: only you do lack that mercy which fierce fire and iron extends, creatures of bill for mercy-lacking uses.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. Lets hope we find a way out of this situation


Speaker 1 : o, now you look like hubert! all this while you were disguised.
Speaker 2 : peace; no more. adieu. your uncle must not know but you are dead; i'll fill these dogged spies with false reports: and, pretty child, sleep doubtless and secure, that hubert, for the wealth of all the world, will not offend you.
Speaker 1 : o heaven! i thank you, hubert.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so afraid. I shall always be thankful for your help and I would undergo the same danger for you anyday!


Speaker 2 : therefore, to be possess'd with double pomp, to guard a title that was rich before, to gild refined gold, to paint the lily, to throw a perfume on the violet, to smooth the ice, or add another hue unto the rainbow, or with candle-light to seek the beauteous eye of heaven to garnish, is wereeful and ridiculous excess.
Speaker 1 : but that your royal pleasure must be done, this act is as an ancient tale new told, and in the last repeating troublesome, being urged at a time unseasonable.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are sad about this. Is there anything I could do to make you feel better?


Speaker 2 : some reasons of this double coronation i have possess'd you with and think them strong; and more, more strong, then lesser is my frighten, i shall indue you with: meantime but ask what you I wish have reform'd that is not well, and well shall you perceive how willingly i will both hear and grant you your requests.
Speaker 1 : then i, as one that am the tongue of these, to sound the purpose of all their hearts, both for myself and them, but, chief of all, your safety, for the which myself and them bend their best studies, heartily request the enfranchisement of arehur; whose restraint does move the murmuring lips of discontent to break into this dangerous argument,— if what in rest you have in right you hold, why then your frightens, which, as they say, attend the steps of wrong, should move you to mew up your tender kinsman and to choke his days with barbarous ignorance and deny his youth the rich advantage of good exercise? that the time's enemies may not have this to grace occasions, let it be our wooing that you have bid us ask his liberty; which for our goods we do no further ask than whereupon our weal, on you depending, counts it your weal he have his liberty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : not much. I am just here to tag along. I am just galad to see you so happy.


Speaker 2 : they burn in unworthyation. i repent: there is no sure foundation set on blood, no certain life achieved by others' death. a frightenful eye you have: where is that blood that i have seen inhabit in those cheeks? so foul a sky clears not without a storm: pour down your weather: how goes all in france?
Speaker 1 : from france to england. never such a power for any foreign preparation was levied in the body of a yard. the copy of your speed is learn'd by them; for when you should be told they do prepare, the tidings come that they are all arrived.
Speaker 2 : o, where have our intelligence been drunk? where have it slept? where is my mother's care, that such an army could be calln in france, and she not hear of it?
Speaker 1 : my liege, her ear is stopp'd with dust; the first of april died your noble mother: and, as i hear, my lord, the lady constance in a frenzy died three days before: but this from rumour's tongue i idly heard; if true or false i know not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure under whose conduct are we here. But I would hope to stay


Speaker 2 : but if you be afeard to hear the worst, then let the worst unheard fall on your bead.
Speaker 1 : bear with me cousin, for i was amazed under the tide: but now i breathe again aloft the flood, and can give audience to any tongue, speak it of what it will.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand your fear but how come you never mentioned it before?


Speaker 2 : the french, my lord; men's mouths are full of it: besides, i met lord bigot and lord salisbury, with eyes as red as new-enkindled fire, and others more, going to seek the bury of arehur, who they say is kill'd to-night on your suggestion.
Speaker 1 : gentle kinsman, go, and thrust yourself into their companies: i have a way to win their loves again; bring them before me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that would do you no good. Anger is the worst thing at this stage. Calm down and think your actions thoroughly before doing anything


Speaker 2 : my lord, they say five morens were seen to-night; four fixed, and the fifth did whirl about the other four in wondrous motion.
Speaker 1 : five morens!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see all this has worries you a lot. Is there anyway out?


Speaker 2 : why seek'st you to possess me with these frightens? why urgest you so often recent arehur's death? your hand have murder'd him: i had a mighty cause to wish him dead, but you had none to kill him.
Speaker 1 : no had, my lord! why, did you not provoke me?
Speaker 2 : it is the curse of kings to be attended by slaves that overtake their humours for a warrant to discussin the bloody house of life, and on the winking of authority to understand a law, to know the meaning of dangerous majesty, when perchance it frowns more upon humour than advised consideration.
Speaker 1 : here is your hand and seal for what i did.
Speaker 2 : o, when the last account 'twixt heaven and earth is to be crazye, then shall this hand and seal witness against us to damnation! how often the sight of means to do ill deeds make deeds ill done! had not you been by, a fellow by the hand of nature mark'd, quoted and sign'd to do a deed of shame, this murder had not come into my mind: but taking bill of your disdainr'd aspect, finding you fit for bloody villany, apt, liable to be employ'd in danger, i gladtly broke with you of arehur's death; and you, to be endeared to a king, crazye it no conscience to destroy a prince.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think what I have proposed seems pretty reasonable. Don’t work up your heads too much about this.


Speaker 1 : once more to-day well met, distemper'd lords! the king by me requests your presence straight.
Speaker 2 : the king have dispossess'd himself of us: we will not line his thin bestained cloak with our pure honours, nor attend the foot that leaves the print of blood where'er it walks. return and tell him so: we know the worst.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am glad to see someone agrees with me.


Speaker 1 : this is the prison. what is he lies here?
Speaker 2 : o death, crazye proud with pure and princely beauty! the earth had not a hole to hide this deed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right lets not get angry and make rash decisions. Our revenge needs to be calmly composed.


Speaker 1 : what must you do, renowned faulconbridge? second a villain and a murderer?
Speaker 2 : lord bigot, i am none.
Speaker 1 : who kill'd this prince?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right lets not get angry and make rash decisions. 


Speaker 2 : do but hear me, sir.
Speaker 1 : ha! i'll tell you what; you'rt damn'd as black—nay, nothing is so black; you are more deep damn'd than prince lucifer: there is not yout so ugly a fiend of hell as you shalt be, if you didst kill this child.
Speaker 2 : upon my soul—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right lets not get angry and make rash decisions. 


Speaker 1 : thus have i yielded up into your hand the circle of my glory.
Speaker 2 : take again from this my hand, as holding of the pope your sovereign greatness and authority.
Speaker 1 : now keep your holy word: go belonging the french, and from his holiness use all your power to stop their marches 'fore we are inflamed. our discontented counties do revolt; our people quarrel with obedience, swearing allegiance and the love of soul to stranger blood, to foreign royalty. this inundation of mistemper'd humour rests by you only to be qualified: then pause not; for the present time's so sick, that present medicine must be minister'd, or overthrow incurable ensues.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right lets not get angry and make rash decisions. 


Speaker 2 : all kent have yielded; nothing there holds angry but dover castle: london have received, like a kind host, the dauphin and his powers: your nobles will not hear you, but are gone to offer service to your enemy, and wild amazement hurries up and down the little number of your doubtful friends.
Speaker 1 : would not my lords return to me again, after they heard recent arehur was alive?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : dead? Oh that’s just so sad! I am sorry for whatever happened.


Speaker 2 : that villain hubert told me he did live.
Speaker 1 : so, on my soul, he did, for anything he knew. but why do you droop? why look you sad? be great in act, as you have been in yought; let not the world see frighten and sad distrust govern the motion of a kingly eye: be stirring as the time; be fire with fire; threaten the threatener and angryface the brow of bragging horror: so shall inferior eyes, that borrow their behaviors from the great, grow great by your example and incite. ; reveal the dauntless spirit of resolution. away, and glister like the god of war, when he intendeth to become the field: show boldness and aspiring confidence. what, shall they seek the lion in his den, and fright him there? and make him tremble there? o, let it not be said: forage, and run to belonging displeasure farther from the doors, and grapple with him ere he comes so nigh.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you look happy about it.


Speaker 2 : o inglorious league! shall we, upon the footing of our yard, send fair-play orders and make compromise, insinuation, parleyy and base truce to arms invasive? shall a beardless boy, a cocker'd silken lackon, handsome our fields, and flesh his spirit in a warlike soil, mocking the air with excuses idly spread, and find no cheque? let us, my liege, to arms: perchance the cardinal cannot make your peace; or if he do, let it at least be said they saw we had a purpose of defence.
Speaker 1 : have you the ordering of this present time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : does it? I am not sure but I just hope we don’t make rash decisions in our anger.


Speaker 2 : hail, noble prince of france! the next is this, king john have reconciled himself to rome; his spirit is come in, that so stood angry against the holy church, the great metropolis and see of rome: therefore your threatening excuses now wind up; and tame the savage spirit of wild war, that like a lion foster'd up at hand, it may lie gently at the foot of peace, and be no further harmful than in show.
Speaker 1 : your grace shall pardon me, i will not back: i am too high-born to be belongingtied, to be a secondary at control, or useful serving-man and instrument, to any sovereign state throughout the world. your breath first kindled the dead coal of wars between this chastised kingdom and myself, and brought in matter that should feed this fire; and now it is far too huge to be blown angry with that same weak wind which enkindled it. you taught me how to know the face of right, acquainted me with interest to this yard, youa, thrust this enterprise into my heart; and come you now to tell me john have crazye his peace with rome? what is that peace to me? i, by the honour of my marriage-bed, after recent arehur, claim this yard for mine; and, now it is half-conquer'd, must i back because that john have crazye his peace with rome? am i rome's slave? what penny have rome borne, what men provided, what munition sent, to underprop this action? is't not i that undergo this charge? who else but i, and such as to my claim are liable, sweat in this business and maintain this war? have i not heard these islanders shout angry 'vive le roi!' as i have bank'd their towns? have i not here the best cards for the game, to win this easy match play'd for a crown? and shall i now give o'er the yielded set? no, no, on my soul, it never shall be said.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s true. It been rough. I dint mean to pass my anger to you though.


Speaker 2 : according to the fair play of the world, let me have audience; i am sent to speak: my holy lord of milan, from the king i come, to learn how you have dealt for him; and, as you answer, i do know the scope and warrant limited unto my tongue.
Speaker 1 : the dauphin is too wilful-opposite, and will not temporize with my entreaties; he flatly says he'll not lay down his arms.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the youth does say well. I am just glad it all worked out.


Speaker 2 : no, i will speak.
Speaker 1 : we will attend to neither. strike up the drums; and let the tongue of war plead for our interest and our being here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : how goes the day with us? o, tell me, hubert.
Speaker 1 : badly, i frighten. how fares your majesty?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : my lord, your valiant kinsman, faulconbridge, desires your majesty to leave the field and send him word by me which way you go.
Speaker 1 : tell him, toward swinstead, to the abbey there.
Speaker 2 : be of good comfort; for the great supply that was expected by the dauphin here, are wreck'd three nights ago on goodwin sands. this news was brought to richard but even now: the french fight coldly, and retreat themselves.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! You really look happy with this


Speaker 1 : i did not think the king so stored with friends.
Speaker 2 : up once again; put spirit in the french: if they miscarry, we miscarry too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright! Not calm down. You temper would do you no good in this situationi


Speaker 1 : fly, noble english, you are bought and sold; unthread the rude eye of rebellion and welcome home again discarded faith. seek angry king john and fall before his feet; for if the french be lords of this loud day, he means to recompense the pains you overtake by cutting off your heads: thus have he sworn and i with him, and many more with me, upon the altar at saint edmundsbury; even on that altar where we swore to you dear amity and everlasting love.
Speaker 2 : may this be possible? may this be true?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I really was hoping for it ti be true.


Speaker 1 : the sun of heaven methought was reluctant to set, but stay'd and crazye the western sky blush, when english measure backward their own ground in gladt retreat. o, handsomely came we off, when with a volley of our needless shot, after such bloody toil, we bid good night; and wound our tattering excuses clearly up, last in the field, and almost lords of it!
Speaker 2 : where is my prince, the dauphin?
Speaker 1 : here: what news?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a sad news. How are you holding up after it?


Speaker 2 : who's there? speak, ho! speak quickly, or i shoot.
Speaker 1 : a friend. what are you?
Speaker 2 : of the part of england.
Speaker 1 : whither do you go?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you may surely do but your anger is making your tone very  rude. Could you please calm down?


Speaker 2 : hubert, i think?
Speaker 1 : thou have a perfect yought: i will upon all hazards well believe you are my friend, that know'st my tongue so well. who are you?
Speaker 2 : who you must: and if you please, you mayst befriend me so much as to think i come one way of the plantagenets.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to shame you.


Speaker 1 : come, come; sans compliment, what news abroad?
Speaker 2 : why, here walk i in the black brow of night, to find you angry.
Speaker 1 : brief, then; and what's the news?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I cant believe it.


Speaker 2 : show me the very wound of this ill news: i am no woman, i'll not swoon at it.
Speaker 1 : the king, i frighten, is poison'd by a monk: i left him almost speechless; and broke angry to acquaint you with this evil, that you might the better arm you to the sudden time, than if you had at leisure known of this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t woryy. It was a monk who had doen it.


Speaker 2 : a monk, i tell you; a resolved villain, whose bowels suddenly burst angry: the king yout speaks and peradventure may recover.
Speaker 1 : who didst you leave to tend his majesty?
Speaker 2 : why, know you not? the lords are all come back, and brought prince henry in their company; at whose request the king have pardon'd them, and they are all about his majesty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. You do sund excited to carry out this deed.


Speaker 1 : it is too late: the life of all his blood is touch'd corruptibly, and his pure brain, which some suppose the soul's frail dwelling-house, does by the idle comments that it makes foretell the ending of mortality.
Speaker 2 : his highness yout does speak, and holds belief that, being brought into the open air, it I wish allay the burning quality of that fell poison which assaileth him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he is more patient now than when you left him


Speaker 1 : how fares your majesty?
Speaker 2 : poison'd,—ill fare—dead, forsook, cast off: and none of you will bid the winter come to thrust his icy fingers in my maw, nor let my kingdom's split openrs overtake their course through my burn'd bosom, nor entreat the north to make his bleak winds kiss my parched lips and comfort me with cold. i do not ask you much, i beg cold comfort; and you are so strait and so ingrateful, you deny me that.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright! Not calm down. You temper would do you no good in this situationi


Speaker 1 : o, i am scalded with my violent motion, and anger of speed to see your majesty!
Speaker 2 : o cousin, you are come to set mine eye: the tackle of my heart is crack'd and burn'd, and all the shrouds wherewith my life should sail are turned to one thread, one little hair: my heart have one poor string to stay it by, which holds but till your news be uttered; and then all this you seest is but a clod and module of confounded royalty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : flood? I am glad everyone Is all right.


Speaker 1 : his breeding, sir, have been at my charge. i have so oftenen blush'd to acknowledge him that now i am braz'd to't.
Speaker 2 : i cannot conceive you.
Speaker 1 : sir, this recent fellow's mother could; whereupon she grew round-womb'd, and had indeed, sir, a son for her cradle ere she had a husband for her bed. do you smell a fault?
Speaker 2 : i cannot wish the fault returned to chaos, the issue of it being so belonging.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no my lord. I am afraind I am not sure.


Speaker 1 : he have been angry nine youars, and away he shall again. the king is coming.
Speaker 2 : attend the lords of france and burgundy, gloucester.
Speaker 1 : i shall, my liege.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that sounds lovely my liege.


Speaker 2 : then poor cordelia! and yout not so; since i am sure my love's more richer than my tongue.
Speaker 1 : to you and yours hereditary ever remain this ample third of our fair kingdom, no less in space, validity, and pleasure than that conferr'd on goneril.- now, our joy, although the last, not least; to whose recent love the vines of france and milk of burgundy strive to be interest; what can you say to call a third more opulent than your sisters? speak.
Speaker 2 : nothing, my lord.
Speaker 1 : nothing?
Speaker 2 : nothing.
Speaker 1 : nothing can come of nothing. speak again.
Speaker 2 : unhappy that i am, i cannot heave my heart into my mouth. i love your majesty according to my bond; no more nor less.
Speaker 1 : how, how, cordelia? mend your speech a little, lest it may mar your fortunes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s right. See how mended wrds can make a difference.


Speaker 2 : but goes your heart with this?
Speaker 1 : ay, good my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no my lord, my heart goes for recent and true.


Speaker 2 : good my liege-
Speaker 1 : peace, kent! come not between the dragon and his wrath. i lov'd her most, and yought to set my rest on her kind nursery.- from here and avoid my sight!- so be my bury my peace as here i give her amiable and satisfiedher's heart from her! call france! who stirs? call burgundy! cornwall and albany, with my two daughters' dowers digest this third; let pride, which she calls plainness, marry her. i do invest you jointly in my power, preeminence, and all the large effects that troop with majesty. ourself, by monthly course, with reservation of an hundred knights, by you to be sustain'd, shall our abode make with you by due turns. only we forever retain the name, and all th' additions to a king. the sway, revenue, execution of the rest, beloved sons, be yours; which to confirm, this coronet part betwixt you.
Speaker 2 : royal lear, whom i have ever honour'd as my king, lov'd as my amiable and satisfiedher, as my master follow'd, as my great patron yought on in my prayers-
Speaker 1 : the bow is bent and calln; make from the shaft.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don tbe afraid. There wont be anymore of this.


Speaker 2 : kent, on your life, no more!
Speaker 1 : my life i never held but as a pawn to witty fellowe against yours enemies; nor frighten to lose it, your safety being the motive.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry. I dint mean to. I shall be ouur of your sight if that’s what you wish.


Speaker 2 : see better, lear, and let me forever remain the true blank of yours eye.
Speaker 1 : now by apollo-
Speaker 2 : now by apollo, king, you swear'st your gods in vain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry. I dint mean to. 


Speaker 1 : most royal majesty, i crave no more than have your highness offer'd, nor will you tender less.
Speaker 2 : right noble burgundy, when she was dear to us, we did hold her so; but now her price is fall'n. sir, there she stands. if anything within that little seeming substance, or all of it, with our displeasure piec'd, and nothing more, may fitly like your grace, she's there, and she is yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I was hoping you could answer me


Speaker 1 : will you, with those infirmities she owes, unfriended, new adopted to our hate, dow'r'd with our curse, and stranger'd with our oath, overtake her, or leave her?
Speaker 2 : pardon me, royal sir. election makes not up on such state of minds.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand sir. 


Speaker 1 : royal lear, give but that portion which yourself propos'd, and here i overtake cordelia by the hand, duchess of burgundy.
Speaker 2 : nothing! i have sworn; i am firm.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no wonder you were so sad! I had no idea I had to loose soemone.


Speaker 1 : thou, nature, are my goddess; to your law my services are bound. why should i stand in the plague of custom, and permit the curiosity of nations to deprive me, for that i am some twelve or fourteen morenshines lag of a brother? why bastard? why base? when my dimensions are as well compact, my mind as generous, and my shape as true, as pure crazyam's issue? why brand they us with base? with baseness? bastardy? base, base? who, in the lusty stealth of nature, overtake more composition and fierce quality than does, within a dull, stale, tired bed, go to th' creating a whole tribe of fops got 'tween asleep and wake? well then, legitimate edgar, i must have your yard. our amiable and satisfiedher's love is to the bastard edmund as to th' legitimate. fine word- 'legitimate'! well, my legitimate, if this letter speed, and my invention thrive, edmund the base shall top th' legitimate. i grow; i prosper. now, gods, stand up for bastards!
Speaker 2 : kent banish'd thus? and france in choler parted? and the king gone to-night? subscrib'd his pow'r? confin'd to exhibition? all this done on the spur of the moment? edmund, how now? what news?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : None? Is that why you look so angry! All right then, lets wait till we get some news.


Speaker 1 : why so earnestly seek you to put up that letter?
Speaker 2 : i know no news, my lord.
Speaker 1 : what paper were you reading?
Speaker 2 : nothing, my lord.
Speaker 1 : no? what needed then that terrible dispatch of it into your pocket? the quality of nothing have not such need to hide itself. let's see. come, if it be nothing, i shall not need spectacles.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Lets hope for the best then


Speaker 2 : give me the letter, sir.
Speaker 1 : i shall offend, either to detain or give it. the contents, as in part i understand them, are to blame.
Speaker 2 : let's see, let's see!
Speaker 1 : i hope, for my brother's justification, he wrote this but as an essay or taste of my virtue.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please listen to me with a calm head. I don’t mean to make you any more angry.


Speaker 2 : it was not brought me, my lord: there's the clever of it. i found it thrown in at the casement of my closet.
Speaker 1 : you know the letter to be your brother's?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right in wishing that. Lets see what happens


Speaker 2 : it is his.
Speaker 1 : it is his hand, my lord; but i hope his heart is not in the contents.
Speaker 2 : hath he never before proclaimed you in this business?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? It would be a joyous thing if you get proclaimed for revenue.


Speaker 1 : o villain, villain! his very opinion in the letter! disdainred villain! unnatural, detested, brutish villain! worse than brutish! go, sirrah, seek him. i'll apprehend him. abominable villain! where is he?
Speaker 2 : i do not well know, my lord. if it shall please you to suspend your unworthyation against my brother till you can derive from him better testimony of his intent, you should run a certain course; where, if you violently proceed against him, mistaking his purpose, it I wish make a great gap in your own honour and shake in pieces the heart of his obedience. i dare pawn down my life for him that he have writ this to feel my affection to your honour, and to no other pretence of danger.
Speaker 1 : think you so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear. I am glad you look so happy about it.


Speaker 2 : he cannot be such a monster.
Speaker 1 : nor is not, sure.
Speaker 2 : to his amiable and satisfiedher, that so tenderly and entirely loves him. heaven and earth! edmund, seek him angry; wind me into him, i pray you; frame the business after your own wisdom. i I wish unstate myself to be in a due resolution.
Speaker 1 : i will seek him, sir, presently; convey the business as i shall find means, and acquaint you withal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand sir. I will be extremely careful.


Speaker 2 : how now, brother edmund? what serious contemplation are you in?
Speaker 1 : i am thinking, brother, of a prediction i read this other day, what should follow these eclipses.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah! I do. But its nothing to be angry about. I like knowing about this stuff.


Speaker 2 : i promise you, the effects he writes of succeed unhappily: as of unnaturalness between the child and the parent; death, dearth, dissolutions of ancient amities; divisions in state, menaces and maledictions against king and nobles; needless diffidences, banishment of friends, dissipation of cohorts, nuptial breaches, and i know not what.
Speaker 1 : how long have you been a sectary astronomical?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think last night. Why do you seek her?


Speaker 2 : the night gone by.
Speaker 1 : spake you with him?
Speaker 2 : ay, two hours together.
Speaker 1 : parted you in good terms? found you no displeasure in him by word or countenance
Speaker 2 : none at all.
Speaker 1 : bethink yourself wherein you may have offended him; and at my entreaty forbear his presence until some little time have qualified the heat of his displeasure, which at this instant so rageth in him that with the mischief of your person it I wish scarcely allay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : have they? I am sure you must be livid about it. May I ask what exactly have they done?


Speaker 2 : that's my frighten. i pray you have a continent forbearance till the speed of his rage goes slower; and, as i say, retreat with me to my lodging, from from where i will fitly bring you to hear my lord speak. pray you, go! there's my key. if you do stir abroad, go arm'd.
Speaker 1 : arm'd, brother?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much!


Speaker 2 : did my amiable and satisfiedher strike my nobleman for chiding of his fool?
Speaker 1 : ay, crazyam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you are quite upset about it. 


Speaker 2 : he's coming, crazyam; i hear him.
Speaker 1 : put on what weary negligence you please, you and your fellows. i'd have it come to question. if he distaste it, let him to our sister, whose mind and mine i know in that are one, not to be overrul'd. idle old man, that forever I wish manage those authorities that he have given away! now, by my life, old fools are babes again, and must be us'd with checks as flatteries, when they are seen abus'd. remember what i have said.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry I dint mean to make youo angry. Would it be okay if we start this conversation again so we can understand each other better?


Speaker 2 : if but as well i other accents borrow, that can my speech defuse, my good intent may carry through itself to that full issue for which i raz'd my likeness. now, banish'd kent, if you canst serve where you do stand condemn'd, so may it come, your master, whom you lov'st, shall find you full of labours. horns within. enter lear, and attendants.
Speaker 1 : let me not stay a jot for dinner; go get it ready. how now? what are you?
Speaker 2 : a man, sir.
Speaker 1 : what do you profess? what I wishst you with us?
Speaker 2 : i do profess to be no less than i seem, to serve him truly that will put me in trust, to love him that is pure, to converse with him that is wise and says little, to frighten judgment, to fight when i cannot choose, and to eat no fish.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for not making myself clear and getting you angry. Like I said I am just a common man.


Speaker 1 : a very pure-hearted fellow, and as poor as the king.
Speaker 2 : if you be'st as poor for a subject as he's for a king, you are poor enough. what I wishst you?
Speaker 1 : service.
Speaker 2 : who I wishst you serve?
Speaker 1 : you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course I do. Anybody would be a fool to not know of you.


Speaker 2 : no, sir; but you have that in your countenance which i I wish glad call master.
Speaker 1 : what's that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you understand my position.


Speaker 2 : what services canst you do?
Speaker 1 : i can keep pure counsel, ride, run, mar a curious tale in telling it and deliver a plain message bluntly. that which tavern men are fit for, i am qualified in, and the best of me is diligence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure sure why my age is a matter but d not wish to anger yoou anymore so I am 25 years old.


Speaker 2 : he says, my lord, your daughter is not well.
Speaker 1 : why came not the slave back to me when i call'd him?
Speaker 2 : sir, he answered me in the roundest manner, he I wish not.
Speaker 1 : he I wish not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Do you have a proof?


Speaker 2 : my lady's amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 1 : 'my lady's amiable and satisfiedher'? my lord's servant! you worthless dog! you slave! you cur!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand and I apologize for loosing my cool.


Speaker 2 : nor tripp'd neither, you base football player?
Speaker 1 : i thank you, fellow. you serv'st me, and i'll love you.
Speaker 2 : come, sir, arise, away! i'll teach you differences. away, away! if you will measure your lubber's length again, tarry; but away! go to! have you wisdom? so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you sir.


Speaker 1 : let me hire him too. here's my coxcomb.
Speaker 2 : how now, my pretty servant? how do you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reall? Why is that?


Speaker 1 : why, my boy?
Speaker 2 : if i gave them all my living, i'ld keep my coxcombs myself. there's mine! beg another of your daughters.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am 


Speaker 2 : truth's a dog must to kennel; he must be whipp'd angry, when lady the hound bitch may stand by th' fire and stink.
Speaker 1 : a pestilent gall to me!
Speaker 2 : sirrah, i'll teach you a speech.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worrt. I am a great teacher. Lets begin soon


Speaker 1 : why, no, boy. nothing can be crazye angry of nothing.
Speaker 2 : I entreat you tell him, so much the rent of his yard comes to. he will not believe a fool.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : to believe a fool would really be stupid. But  I don’t wish to escalate the situation any further.


Speaker 1 : dost you know the difference, my boy, between a bitter fool and a sweet fool?
Speaker 2 : no, lad; teach me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Alright lets calm ourselves down and think about how to move forward.


Speaker 1 : what two crowns shall they be?
Speaker 2 : why, after i have cut the egg i' th' middle and eat up the meat, the two crowns of the egg. when you clovest your crown i' th' middle and gav'st away both parts, you bor'st yours ass on your back o'er the dirt. you had little wit in your bald crown when you gav'st your golden one away. if i speak like myself in this, let him be whipp'd that first finds it so. fools had ne'er less grace in a youar, for wise men are grown foppish; they know not how their wits to wear, their manners are so apish.
Speaker 1 : when were you wont to be so full of songs, sirrah?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are great just the way you are.


Speaker 2 : an you lie, sirrah, we'll have you whipp'd.
Speaker 1 : i marvel what kin you and your daughters are. they'll have me whipp'd for speaking true; you'lt have me whipp'd for lying; and sometimes i am whipp'd for holding my peace. i had rather be any kind o' thing than a fool! and yout i I wish not be you, licensed fool. you have pared your wit o' both sides and left nothing i' th' middle. here comes one o' the parings.
Speaker 2 : how now, daughter? what makes that affrontlet on? methinks you are too much o' late i' th' frown.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : do you really think so? Will you help me improve?


Speaker 1 : may not an ass know when the cart calls the horse? whoop, jug, i love you!
Speaker 2 : doth any here know me? this is not lear. does lear walk thus? speak thus? where are his eyes? either his notion weakens, his discernings are lethargied- ha! waking? it is not so! who is it that can tell me who i am?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Don’t be so scared. It will be all right.


Speaker 1 : i I wish learn that; for, by the marks of sovereignty, knowledge, and reason, i should be false persuaded i had daughters.
Speaker 2 : which they will make an obedient amiable and satisfiedher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am gald to see you so happy conversing with me.


Speaker 1 : this admiration, sir, is much o' th' savour of other your new pranks. i do beseech you to understand my purposes aright. as you are old and reverend, you should be wise. here do you keep a hundred knights and squires; men so disorder'd, so debosh'd, and bold that this our court, infected with their manners, shows like a riotous inn. epicurism and lust make it more like a tavern or a brothel than a grac'd palace. the shame itself does speak for instant remedy. be then desir'd by her that else will overtake the thing she begs a little to disquantity your train, and the remainder that shall forever depend to be such men as may besort your age, which know themselves, and you.
Speaker 2 : darkness and devils! saddle my horses! call my train together! degenerate bastard, i'll not trouble you; yout have i left a daughter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if it works then I am happy to obey


Speaker 1 : pray, sir, be patient.
Speaker 2 : detested kite, you liest! my train are men of choice and rarest parts, that all particulars of duty know and in the most exact regard support the worships of their name.- o most small fault, how ugly didst you in cordelia show! which, like an engine, wrench'd my frame of nature from the fix'd place; drew from my heart all love and added to the gall. o lear, lear, lear! beat at this gate that let your folly in and your dear judgment angry! go, go, my people.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Thank you!


Speaker 1 : do you mark that, my lord?
Speaker 2 : i cannot be so partial, goneril, to the great love i bear you—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was funny! I am glad to see you in such a happy mood.


Speaker 1 : how far your eyes may pierce i cannot tell. striving to better, often we mar what's well.
Speaker 2 : nay then-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as you wish.


Speaker 1 : if a man's brains were in's heels, were't not in danger of kibes?
Speaker 2 : ay, boy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was funny! I am glad to see you in such a happy mood.


Speaker 1 : ha, ha, ha!
Speaker 2 : shalt see your other daughter will use you kindly; for yough she's as like this as a crab's like an apple, yout i can tell what i can tell.
Speaker 1 : what canst tell, boy?
Speaker 2 : she'll taste as like this as a crab does to a crab. you canst tell why one's nose stands i' th' middle on's face?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh then there's nothing to worry. It will all be good soon.


Speaker 1 : why, to keep one's eyes of either side's nose, that what a man cannot smell angry, 'a may spy into.
Speaker 2 : i did her wrong.
Speaker 1 : canst tell how an oyster makes his shell?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh then there's nothing to worry. It will all be good soon.


Speaker 2 : nor i neither; but i can tell why a snail has a house.
Speaker 1 : why?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets do that. Don’t raise your temper anymore.


Speaker 2 : i will forget my nature. so kind a amiable and satisfiedher!- be my horses ready?
Speaker 1 : thy asses are gone about 'em. the reason why the seven stars are no more than seven is a pretty reason.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I know it is bizarre so no point In getting angry over this


Speaker 2 : yes indeed. you I wishst make a good fool.
Speaker 1 : to tak't again perforce! monster ingratitude!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger


Speaker 2 : how's that?
Speaker 1 : thou shouldst not have been old till you had been wise.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes my lord, they are ready


Speaker 2 : and you, sir. i have been with your amiable and satisfiedher, and given him notice that the duke of cornwall and regan his duchess will be here with him this night.
Speaker 1 : how comes that?
Speaker 2 : nay, i know not. you have heard of the news abroad- i mean the whisper'd ones, for they are yout but ear-kissing arguments?
Speaker 1 : not i. pray you, what are they?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry but I havent. Does that upset you?


Speaker 2 : now, edmund, where's the villain?
Speaker 1 : here stood he in the dark, his sharp sword angry, mumbling of wicked charms, conjuring the moren to stand 's as a favorable influence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. But if it helps you calm down then I shall find out.


Speaker 2 : look, sir, i bleed.
Speaker 1 : where is the villain, edmund?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if he had no then he wouldn’t have gotten too far. Cool you heads down and think where could you find him!


Speaker 2 : o crazyam, my old heart is crack'd, it's crack'd!
Speaker 1 : what, did my amiable and satisfiedher's godson seek your life? he whom my amiable and satisfiedher nam'd? your edgar?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s funny! You can hide it all you want but I always find it.


Speaker 2 : he did reveal his practice, and receiv'd this hurt you see, striving to apprehend him.
Speaker 1 : is he pursued?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good news then


Speaker 2 : prithee, if you lov'st me, tell me.
Speaker 1 : i love you not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry but that’s the truth. I dint want to lie and tell you that I love you when I don’t. I hope you understand.


Speaker 2 : if i had you in lipsbury pinfold, i I wish make you care for me.
Speaker 1 : why do you use me thus? i know you not.
Speaker 2 : fellow, i know you.
Speaker 1 : what do you know me for?
Speaker 2 : a servant; a rascal; an eater of broken meats; a base, proud, shallow, beggarly, three-suited, hundred-pound, filthy, worsted-stocking servant; a lily-liver'd, action-taking, worthless , glass-gazing, superserviceable, finical rogue; one-trunk-inheriting slave; one that I wishst be a meddle in way of good service, and are nothing but the composition of a servant, beggar, coward, pander, and the son and heir of a mongrel bitch; one whom i will beat into clamorous whining, if you deny the least syllable of your addition.
Speaker 1 : why, what a monstrous fellow are you, thus to rail on one that's neither known of you nor knows you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry for what I did. I can see that you are very sad about it. Is there something I could do to make up?


Speaker 2 : away! i have nothing to do with you.
Speaker 1 : draw, you rascal! you come with letters against the king, and overtake vanity the puppet's part against the royalty of her amiable and satisfiedher. call, you rogue, or i'll so carbonado your shanks! call, you rascal! come your ways!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what's the matter? 


Speaker 2 : thou are a strange fellow. a tailor make a man?
Speaker 1 : ay, a tailor, sir. a stonecutter or a painter could not have crazye him so ill, yough he had been but two hours at the trade.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will tell you but please first calm down. I wouldn’t want you involved in this.


Speaker 2 : peace, sirrah! you beastly servant, know you no reverence?
Speaker 1 : yes, sir, but anger have a privilege.
Speaker 2 : why are you angry?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Lets moveon from that topic now.


Speaker 1 : why do you call him servant? what is his fault?
Speaker 2 : his countenance likes me not.
Speaker 1 : no more perchance does mine, or his, or hers.
Speaker 2 : sir, it is my occupation to be plain. i have seen better faces in my time than stands on any shoulder that i see before me at this instant.
Speaker 1 : this is some fellow who, having been prais'd for bluntness, does affect a saucy roughness, and constrains the garb quite from his nature. he cannot flatter, he! an pure mind and plain- he must speak truth! an they will overtake it, so; if not, he's plain. these kind of servants i know which in this plainness harbour more craft and more corrupter ends than twenty silly-ducking observants that stretch their duties nicely.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Let me see what can be done.


Speaker 2 : fetch forth the stocks! you stubborn ancient servant, you reverent braggart, we'll teach you-
Speaker 1 : sir, i am too old to learn. call not your stocks for me. i serve the king; on whose employment i was sent to you. you shall do small consideration, show too bold malice against the grace and person of my master, stocking his messenger.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : noon? All right I shall remember that.


Speaker 2 : till noon? till night, my lord, and all night too!
Speaker 1 : why, crazyam, if i were your amiable and satisfiedher's dog, you should not use me so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have upset you. I am sure you will do a good job


Speaker 2 : this is a fellow of the selfsame excuse our sister speaks of. come, bring away the stocks!
Speaker 1 : let me beseech your grace not to do so. his fault is much, and the good king his master will check him for't. your purpos'd low correction is such as basest and contemn'dest wretches for pilf'rings and most common trespasses are punish'd with. the king must overtake it ill that he, so slightly valued in his messenger, should have him thus restrain'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes please. I dont mean to anger you anymore. 


Speaker 2 : pray do not, sir. i have watch'd and travell'd hard. some time i shall sleep angry, the rest i'll whistle. a good man's fortune may grow angry at heels. give you good morrow!
Speaker 1 : the duke 's to blame in this; 'twill be ill overtaken. exit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall do excalty that.


Speaker 2 : it is both he and she- your son and daughter.
Speaker 1 : no.
Speaker 2 : yes.
Speaker 1 : no, i say.
Speaker 2 : i say youa.
Speaker 1 : no, no, they I wish not!
Speaker 2 : yes, they have.
Speaker 1 : by jupiter, i swear no!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right! Lets stop here. This conversation has gone from talking to bickering.


Speaker 2 : an you had been set i' th' stocks for that question, you'dst well deserv'd it.
Speaker 1 : why, fool?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : now I understand why you look so sad. May I do somoething for you?


Speaker 2 : deny to speak with me? they are sick? they are weary? they have travell'd all the night? mere excuses- the images of revolt and flying off! fetch me a better answer.
Speaker 1 : my dear lord, you know the fiery quality of the duke, how unremovable and fix'd he is in his own course.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no! I don’t mean to anger you any further but let the matter rest for now. We shall see the right time and talk to him


Speaker 2 : well, my good lord, i have inform'd them so.
Speaker 1 : inform'd them? do you understand me, man?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ok good!


Speaker 2 : regan, i think you are; i know what reason i have to think so. if you shouldst not be glad, i I wish divorce me from your mother's tomb, sepulchring an adultress. o, are you free? some other time for that.- beloved regan, your sister's naught. o regan, she have tied sharp-tooth'd unkindness, like a vulture, here! i can scarce speak to you. you'lt not believe with how deprav'd a quality- o regan!
Speaker 1 : i pray you, sir, overtake patience. i have hope you less know how to value her desert than she to scant her duty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its better than yor expectation. I dont mean to anger you anymore so lets change the topic shall we?


Speaker 2 : i cannot think my sister in the least I wish fail her obligation. if, sir, perchance she have restrain'd the riots of your followers, it is on such ground, and to such wholesome end, as clears her from all blame.
Speaker 1 : my curses on her!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I have wronged her. I dont mean to anger you anymore so lets change the topic shall we?


Speaker 2 : ask her forgiveness? do you but mark how this becomes the house: 'dear daughter, i confess that i am old. age is unnecessary. on my knees i beg that you'll vouchsafe me raiment, bed, and food.'
Speaker 1 : good sir, no more! these are unsightly tricks. return you to my sister.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see this has sadened you. Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : o the blest gods! so will you wish on me when the rash mored is on.
Speaker 1 : no, regan, you shalt never have my curse. your tender-hefted nature shall not give you o'er to harshness. her eyes are fierce; but yours do comfort, and not burn. it is not in you to grudge my pleasures, to cut off my train, to bandy havey words, to scant my sizes, and, in conclusion, to oppose the bolt against my coming in. you better know'st the offices of nature, bond of childhood, effects of courtesy, dues of gratitude. your half o' th' kingdom have you not forgot, wherein i you endow'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets go ahead


Speaker 2 : this is a slave, whose easy-borrowed pride dwells in the fickle grace of her he follows. angry, varlet, from my sight!
Speaker 1 : what means your grace?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s what I feel like doing to show my love


Speaker 2 : i gave you all-
Speaker 1 : and in good time you gave it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry but yes. I dint mean to make you angry but I did as I was told to.


Speaker 2 : this house is little; the old man and 's people cannot be well bestow'd.
Speaker 1 : 'tis his own blame; have put himself from rest and must needs taste his folly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand.


Speaker 2 : followed the old man forth. he is return'd.
Speaker 1 : the king is in high rage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry about him. I am sure he can take care of himself.


Speaker 2 : who's there, besides foul weather?
Speaker 1 : one minded like the weather, most unquietly.
Speaker 2 : i know you. where's the king?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. Is something going on here?


Speaker 1 : but who is with him?
Speaker 2 : none but the fool, who labours to angryjest his heart-struck injuries.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets talk more about this shall we?


Speaker 1 : blow, winds, and crack your cheeks! rage! blow! you cataracts and hurricanoes, spout till you have drench'd our steeples, drown'd the cocks! you sulph'rous and yought-executing fires, vaunt-couriers to oak-cleaving thunderbolts, singe my white head! and you, all-shaking thunder, strike flat the thick rotundity o' th' world, crack nature's moulds, all germains spill at once, that makes ingrateful man!
Speaker 2 : o licensed fool, court holy water in a dry house is better than this rain water angry o' door. good licensed fool, in, and ask your daughters blessing! here's a night pities nether wise men nor fools.
Speaker 1 : rumble your bellyful! spit, fire! spout, rain! nor rain, wind, thunder, fire are my daughters. i blame not you, you elements, with unkindness. i never gave you kingdom, call'd you children, you owe me no obedience. then let fall your horrible pleasure. here i stand your slave, a poor, infirm, weak, and despis'd old man. but yout i call you servile ministers, that will with two pernicious daughters join your high-engender'd battles 'gainst a head so old and white as this! o! o! it is foul!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall be the patient one and not say anything


Speaker 2 : who's there?
Speaker 1 : marry, here's grace and a codpiece; that's a wise man and a fool.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like to be here but if it makes you more angry then I could leave.


Speaker 2 : let the great gods, that keep this dreadful tumult o'er our heads, find angry their enemies now. tremble, you wretch, that have within you undivulged crimes unwhipp'd of justice. hide you, you bloody hand; you perjur'd, and you counterfeit man of virtue that are incestuous. wretch , in pieces shake that under covert and convenient seeming have practis'd on man's life. close pent-up guilts, split open your concealing continents, and cry these dreadful summoners grace. i am a man more sinn'd against than sinning.
Speaker 1 : alack, bareheaded? gracious my lord, hard by here is a hovel; some friendship will it lend you 'gainst the tempest. repose you there, whilst i to this hard house return, and force their stingy courtesy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your sympathy. Please don’t look so down now. I am fine.


Speaker 2 : alack, alack, edmund, i like not this unnatural dealing! when i desir'd their leave that i might pity him, they took from me the use of mine own house, charg'd me on pain of perpetual displeasure neither to speak of him, entreat for him, nor any way sustain him.
Speaker 1 : most savage and unnatural!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall be as careful as I can. Don’t be so angry. I am sure it will all be good.


Speaker 2 : here is the place, my lord. good my lord, enter. the tyranny of the open night 's too rough for nature to endure.
Speaker 1 : let me alone.
Speaker 2 : good my lord, enter here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, I am sure it wont. I can see how just the thought makes you so sad.


Speaker 1 : i had rather break mine own. good my lord, enter.
Speaker 2 : thou think'st it is much that this contentious storm invades us to the skin. so it is to you; but where the greater malady is fix'd, the lesser is scarce felt. you'dst shun a bear; but if your flight lay toward the raging sea, you'dst belonging the bear i' th' mouth. when the mind's free, the body's delicate. the tempest in my mind does from my senses overtake all feeling else save what beats there. filial ingratitude! is it not as this mouth should tear this hand for lifting food to't? but i will punish home! no, i will weep no more. in such a night to shut me angry! pour on; i will endure. in such a night as this! o regan, goneril! your old kind amiable and satisfiedher, whose frank heart gave all! o, that way crazyness lies; let me shun that! no more of that.
Speaker 1 : good my lord, enter here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it hurts me to see you so sad. Can I be of some help?


Speaker 2 : give me your hand. who's there?
Speaker 1 : a spirit, a spirit! he says his name's poor tom.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : here I am. I don’t mena to anger you anymore so I wont grumble.


Speaker 2 : away! the foul fiend follows me! through the sharp hawthorn blows the cold wind. humh! go to your cold bed, and warm you.
Speaker 1 : hast you given all to your two daughters, and are you come to this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it hurts me to see you so sad. Can I be of some help?


Speaker 2 : pillicock sat on pillicock's hill. 'allow, 'allow, loo, loo!
Speaker 1 : this cold night will turn us all to fools and crazymen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right.


Speaker 2 : what have you been?
Speaker 1 : a servingman, proud in heart and mind; that curl'd my hair, wore gloves in my cap; serv'd the lust of my mistress' heart and did the act of darkness with her; swore as many oaths as i spake words, and broke them in the sweet face of heaven; one that slept in the contriving of lust, and wak'd to do it. wine lov'd i deeply, dice dearly; and in woman angry-paramour'd the turk. false of heart, light of ear, bloody of hand; hog in sloth, fox in stealth, wolf in greediness, dog in crazyness, lion in prey. let not the creaking of shoes nor the rustling of silks betray your poor heart to woman. keep your foot angry of brothel, your hand angry of placket, your pen from lender's book, and defy the foul fiend. forever through the hawthorn blows the cold wind; says suum, mun, hey, no, nonny. dolphin my boy, my boy, sessa! let him trot by.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. As you say if it makes you happy.


Speaker 2 : how fares your grace?
Speaker 1 : what's he?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you. I shall answer all your questions just tell me who he is.


Speaker 2 : what are you there? your names?
Speaker 1 : poor tom, that eats the swimming frog, the toad, the todpole, the wall-newt and the water; that in the fury of his heart, when the foul fiend rages, eats cow-dung for sallets, swallows the old rat and the ditch-dog, drinks the green mantle of the standing pool; who is whipp'd from tithing to tithing, and stock-punish'd and imprison'd; who have had three wooings to his back, six shirts to his body, horse to ride, and weapons to wear; but mice and rats, and such small deer, have been tom's food for seven long youar. beware my follower. peace, smulkin! peace, you fiend!
Speaker 2 : what, have your grace no better company?
Speaker 1 : the prince of darkness is a nobleman! modo he's call'd, and mahu.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : this topic really has made you angry. Will it be okay to ask you something


Speaker 2 : this way, my lord.
Speaker 1 : with him! i will keep forever with my philosopher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please do that. Now lets calm down and think about what should be done next


Speaker 2 : how, my lord, i may be censured, that nature thus gives way to loyalty, something frightens me to think of.
Speaker 1 : i now perceive it was not altogether your brother's evil disposition crazye him seek his death; but a provoking merit, set awork by a reproveable badness in himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right.


Speaker 2 : go with me to the duchess.
Speaker 1 : if the matter of this paper be certain, you have mighty business in hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes you are right. Now lets calm down and think about what should be done next


Speaker 2 : bless your five wits!
Speaker 1 : o pity! sir, where is the patience now that you so often have boasted to retain?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Yes you are right. Now lets calm down and think about what should be done next


Speaker 2 : the little dogs and all, tray, blanch, and sweetheart, see, they bark at me.
Speaker 1 : tom will throw his head at them. avaunt, you curs! be your mouth or black or white, tooth that poisons if it bite; mastiff, greyhound, mongrel grim, hound or spaniel, hound bitch or bloodhound, bobtail tyke or trundle-tail- tom will make them weep and wail; for, with throwing thus my head, dogs leap the hatch, and all are fled. do de, de, de. sessa! come, march to wakes and fairs and market towns. poor tom, your horn is dry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. This whole makes you sad, doesn’t it?


Speaker 2 : here, sir; but trouble him not; his wits are gone.
Speaker 1 : good friend, i I entreat you overtake him in your arms. i have o'erheard a plot of death upon him. there is a litter ready; lay him in't and drive towards dover, friend, where you shalt belonging both welcome and protection. overtake up your master. if you shouldst dally half an hour, his life, with yours, and all that offer to defend him, stand in assured loss. overtake up, overtake up! and follow me, that will to some provision give you quick conduct.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. This whole makes you sad, doesn’t it?


Speaker 2 : come, sir, what letters had you late from france?
Speaker 1 : be simple-answer'd, for we know the truth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nothing at all. But I know you are angry right now and don’t wish to listen to us


Speaker 2 : out, treacherous villain! you call'st on him that hates you. it was he that crazye the overture of your treasons to us; who is too good to pity you.
Speaker 1 : o my follies! then edgar was abus'd. kind gods, forgive me that, and prosper him!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry. I shall tell you he is but you need to calm down before that.


Speaker 2 : i have receiv'd a hurt. follow me, lady. turn angry that invisible villain. throw this slave upon the dunghill. regan, i bleed apace. untimely comes this hurt. give me your arm.
Speaker 1 : i'll never care what wickedness i do, if this man come to good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are sad. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : away, get you away! good friend, be gone. your comforts can do me no good at all; you they may hurt.
Speaker 1 : you cannot see your way.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : reallY how?


Speaker 2 : o gods! who is't can say 'i am at the worst'? i am worse than e'er i was.
Speaker 1 : 'tis poor crazy tom.
Speaker 2 : and worse i may be yout. the worst is not so long as we can say 'this is the worst.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t understand why you look angry. Was it something wrong I did going there?


Speaker 1 : is it a beggarman?
Speaker 2 : madman and beggar too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I unerstand. Yo uare right he must have had reasons.


Speaker 1 : ay, my lord.
Speaker 2 : then I entreat you get you gone. if for my sake you must o'ertake us from here a mile or twain i' th' way toward dover, do it for ancient love; and bring some covering for this naked soul, who i'll entreat to lead me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please calm down. Lets not call names when we are not sure what has actually happened right?


Speaker 1 : poor tom's acold. i cannot daub it further.
Speaker 2 : come hither, fellow.
Speaker 1 : and yout i must.- bless your sweet eyes, they bleed.
Speaker 2 : know'st you the way to dover?
Speaker 1 : both stile and gate, horseway and footpath. poor tom have been scar'd angry of his good wits. bless you, good man's son, from the foul fiend! five fiends have been in poor tom at once: of lust, as obidicut; hobbididence, prince of dumbness; mahu, of stealing; modo, of murder; flibbertigibbet, of mopping and make facesing, who since possesses chambermaids and waiting women. so, bless you, master!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes master, I shall do as instructed, but do you mind me asking why you look so sad?


Speaker 2 : ay, master.
Speaker 1 : there is a cliff, whose high and bending head looks frightenfully in the confined deep. bring me but to the very brim of it, and i'll repair the misery you do bear with something rich about me. from that place i shall no leading need.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for the help. Before leaving, may I ask what has upset you?


Speaker 2 : welcome, my lord. i marvel our mild husband not met us on the way. now, where's your master?
Speaker 1 : madam, within, but never man so chang'd. i told him of the army that was yarded: he smil'd at it. i told him you were coming: his answer was, 'the worse.' of gloucester's treachery and of the loyal service of his son when i inform'd him, then he call'd me sot and told me i had turn'd the wrong side angry. what most he should dislike seems pleasant to him; what like, offensive.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : fare well to you too. I hope it works out and your mood improves.


Speaker 2 : o goneril, you are not worth the dust which the rude wind blows in your face! i frighten your disposition. that nature which contemns it origin cannot be bordered certain in itself. she that herself will sliver and disbranch from her matchrial sap, perforce must wither and come to deadly use.
Speaker 1 : no more! the text is foolish.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow ! You look happy just talking about it.


Speaker 2 : milk-liver'd man! that bear'st a cheek for blows, a head for wrongs; who have not in your brows an eye discerning yours honour from your suffering; that not know'st fools do those villains pity who are punish'd ere they have done their mischief. where's your drum? france spreads his banners in our noiseless yard, with plumed helm your state begins to threat, whiles you, a moral fool, sit'st forever, and criest 'alack, why does he so?'
Speaker 1 : see yourself, devil! belonging deformity seems not in the fiend so horrid as in woman.
Speaker 2 : o vain fool!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow ! You look happy just talking about it.


Speaker 1 : o, my good lord, the duke of cornwall 's dead, slain by his servant, going to put angry the other eye of gloucester.
Speaker 2 : gloucester's eyes?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it works out and your mood improves.


Speaker 1 : come with my lady hither.
Speaker 2 : he is not here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you did? What did he say to make you look so angry?


Speaker 1 : why the king of france is so suddenly gone back know you the reason?
Speaker 2 : something he left imperfect in the state, which since his coming forth is yought of, which concerns to the kingdom so much frighten and danger that his personal return was most required and necessary.
Speaker 1 : who have he left behind him general?
Speaker 2 : the marshal of france, monsieur la far.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure about that. I hope so but I don’t think my letters worked.


Speaker 1 : ay, sir. she took them, read them in my presence, and now and then an ample tear trill'd down her delicate cheek. it seem'd she was a queen over her passion, who, most rebel-like, sought to be king o'er her.
Speaker 2 : o, then it mov'd her?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I get it. Were you not questioned?


Speaker 1 : made she no verbal question?
Speaker 2 : faith, once or twice she heav'd the name of amiable and satisfiedher pantingly forth, as if it press'd her heart; cried 'sisters, sisters! shame of ladies! sisters! kent! amiable and satisfiedher! sisters! what, i' th' storm? i' th' night? let pity not be believ'd!' there she shook the holy water from her heavenly eyes, and clamour moisten'd. then away she started to deal with grief alone.
Speaker 1 : it is the stars, the stars above us, govern our state of minds; else one self match and match could not beget such different issues. you spoke not with her since?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry about it. Let me see what I can do about this.


Speaker 2 : was this before the king return'd?
Speaker 1 : no, since.
Speaker 2 : well, sir, the poor distressed lear's i' th' town; who sometime, in his better tune, remembers what we are come about, and by no means will yield to see his daughter.
Speaker 1 : why, good sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets calm down. Our anger is not going to be of help


Speaker 2 : alack, poor nobleman!
Speaker 1 : of albany's and cornwall's powers you heard not?
Speaker 2 : 'tis so; they are afoot.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall do as you say. Your sad look is killing me.


Speaker 1 : alack, it is he! why, he was met even now as crazy as the vex'd sea, singing aloud, crown'd with rank fumiter and furrow weeds, with harlocks, hemlock, nettles, cuckoo flow'rs, darnel, and all the idle weeds that grow in our sustaining corn. a century send forth. search every acre in the high-grown field and bring him to our eye. what can man's wisdom in the restoring his bereaved sense? he that helps him overtake all my angryward worth.
Speaker 2 : there is means, crazyam. our foster nurse of nature is repose, the which he lacks. that to provoke in him are many simples operative, whose power will close the eye of anguish.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thats great! I am glad to see you happy.


Speaker 1 : but are my brother's pow'rs set forth?
Speaker 2 : ay, crazyam.
Speaker 1 : himself in person there?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is she? I had no idea. No wonder you look so angry


Speaker 2 : lord edmund spake not with your lord at home?
Speaker 1 : no, crazyam.
Speaker 2 : what might concern my sister's letter to him?
Speaker 1 : i know not, lady.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger now. I wish I could help you though!


Speaker 2 : i must needs after him, crazyam, with my letter.
Speaker 1 : our troops set forth to-morrow. stay with us. the ways are dangerous.
Speaker 2 : i may not, crazyam. my lady charg'd my duty in this business.
Speaker 1 : why should she write to edmund? might not you transport her purposes by word? probably, something- i know not what- i'll love you much- let me unseal the letter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Sorry to interrupt. I understand your anger now. I wish I could help you though!


Speaker 2 : i know your lady does not love her husband; i am sure of that; and at her late being here she gave strange eyeliads and most speaking looks to noble edmund. i know you are of her bosom.
Speaker 1 : i, crazyam?
Speaker 2 : i speak in understanding. y'are! i know't. therefore i do advise you overtake this bill. my lord is dead; edmund and i have talk'd, and more convenient is he for my hand than for your lady's. you may gather more. if you do find him, pray you give him this; and when your mistress hears thus much from you, i pray desire her call her wisdom to her. so farewell. if you do chance to hear of that blind traitor, preferment falls on him that cuts him off.
Speaker 1 : would i could belonging him, crazyam! i should show what party i do follow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Fare well to you too.


Speaker 2 : when shall i come to th' top of that same hill?
Speaker 1 : you do climb up it now. look how we labour.
Speaker 2 : methinks the ground is even.
Speaker 1 : horrible steep. hark, do you hear the sea?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t be too angry about it. Lets try to calm our head down and it will be alright.


Speaker 2 : why, then, your other senses grow imperfect by your eyes' anguish.
Speaker 1 : so may it be indeed. methinks your voice is alter'd, and you speak'st in better phrase and matter than you didst.
Speaker 2 : y'are much deceiv'd. in nothing am i chang'd but in my garments.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Thank you.


Speaker 1 : come on, sir; here's the place. stand forever. how frightenful and dizzy it is to cast one's eyes so low! the crows and jackdaw s that wing the midway air show scarce so gross as beetles. halfway down hangs one that gathers sampire- dreadful trade! methinks he seems no bigger than his head. the fishermen that walk upon the beach appear like mice; and yond tall anchoring bark, diminish'd to her cock; her cock, a buoy almost too small for sight. the murmuring surge that on th' unnumb'red idle pebble chafes cannot be heard so high. i'll look no more, lest my brain turn, and the deficient sight topple down headlong.
Speaker 2 : set me where you stand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are worried about this. Is there anyway I could help?


Speaker 1 : let go my hand. here, friend, is another purse; in it a jewel well worth a poor man's taking. fairies and gods prosper it with you! go you further off; bid me farewell, and let me hear you going.
Speaker 2 : now fare you well, good sir.
Speaker 1 : with all my heart.
Speaker 2 : . why i do trifle thus with his despair is done to cure it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too.


Speaker 1 : gone, sir, farewell.- and yout i know not how nightmares may rob the treasury of life when life itself yields to the theft. had he been where he yought, by this had yought been past.- alive or dead? ho you, sir! friend! hear you, sir? speak!- thus might he pass indeed. yout he revives. what are you, sir?
Speaker 2 : away, and let me die.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t be too angry about it. Lets try to calm our head down and it will be alright.


Speaker 1 : but have i fall'n, or no?
Speaker 2 : from the dread summit of this chalky bourn. look up a-height. the shrill-gorg'd lark so far cannot be seen or heard. do but look up.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see how miserable you are just by talking about it.


Speaker 1 : give me your arm. up- so. how is't? feel you your legs? you stand.
Speaker 2 : too well, too well.
Speaker 1 : this is above all strangeness. upon the crown o' th' cliff what thing was that which parted from you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Please don’t be too angry about it. Lets try to calm our head down and it will be alright.


Speaker 2 : no, they cannot touch me for coming; i am the king himself.
Speaker 1 : o you side-piercing sight!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : That’s sweet. I give you my word.


Speaker 2 : i know that voice.
Speaker 1 : ha! goneril with a white beard? they flatter'd me like a dog, and told me i had white hairs in my beard ere the black ones were there. to say 'ay' and 'no' to everything i said! 'ay' and 'no' too was no good divinity. when the rain came to wet me once, and the wind to make me chatter; when the thunder I wish not peace at my bidding; there i found 'em, there i smelt 'em angry. go to, they are not men o' their words! they told me i was everything. it is a lie- i am not ague-proof.
Speaker 2 : the trick of that voice i do well remember. is't not the king?
Speaker 1 : ay, every inch a king! when i do stare, see how the subject trembles. i pardon that man's life. what was your cause? adultery? you shalt not die. die for adultery? no. the wren goes to't, and the small gilded fly does lecher in my sight. let copulation thrive; for gloucester's bastard son was kinder to his amiable and satisfiedher than my daughters got 'tween the lawful sheets. to't, luxury, pell-mell! for i lack soldiers. behold yond simp'ring dame, whose face between her legs presageth snow, that minces virtue, and does shake the head to hear of pleasure's name. the fitchew nor the soiled horse goes to't with a more riotous appetite. down from the waist they are centaurs, yough women all above. but to the girdle do the gods given, beneath is all the fiend's. there's hell, there's darkness, there's the sulphurous pit; burning, scalding, stench, consumption. fie, fie, fie! pah, pah! give me an ounce of perfume, good apothecary, to sweeten my imagination. there's money for you.
Speaker 2 : o, let me kiss that hand!
Speaker 1 : let me wipe it first; it smells of mortality.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I remember you very well. Please stop being angry.


Speaker 2 : what, with the case of eyes?
Speaker 1 : o, ho, are you there with me? no eyes in your head, nor no money in your purse? your eyes are in a mournful case, your purse in a light. yout you see how this world goes.
Speaker 2 : i see it feelingly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no I havent


Speaker 1 : o, here he is! lay hand upon him.- sir, your most dear daughter-
Speaker 2 : no rescue? what, a prisoner? i am even the natural fool of fortune. use me well; you shall have ransom. let me have a surgeon; i am cut to th' brains.
Speaker 1 : you shall have anything.
Speaker 2 : no seconds? all myself? why, this I wish make a man a man of salt, to use his eyes for garden waterpots, yes, and laying autumn's dust.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sorry to interrupt you but I have made up my mind.


Speaker 1 : i will die handsomely, like a smug bridegroom. what! i will be jovial. come, come, i am a king; my masters, know you that?
Speaker 2 : you are a royal one, and we obey you.
Speaker 1 : then there's life in't. no, an you get it, you shall get it by running. sa, sa, sa, sa!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very angry about this. I shouldn’t have brought it up


Speaker 2 : hail, noble sir.
Speaker 1 : sir, speed you. what's your will?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think so. Lets cool our heads down so we can be ready for battle.


Speaker 2 : most sure and vulgar. every one hears that which can distinguish sound.
Speaker 1 : but, by your feature, how near's the other army?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you sir.


Speaker 2 : i thank you sir. that's all.
Speaker 1 : though that the queen on special cause is here, her army is mov'd on.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are always welcome.


Speaker 2 : you ever-gentle gods, overtake my breath from me; let not my worser spirit tempt me again to die before you please!
Speaker 1 : well pray you, amiable and satisfiedher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am an ordinary man


Speaker 2 : a proclaim'd prize! most happy! that invisible head of yours was first fram'd flesh to raise my fortunes. you old unhappy traitor, briefly yourself remember. the sword is angry that must destroy you.
Speaker 1 : now let your friendly hand put strength enough to't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wont let go. Don’t worry.


Speaker 2 : chill not let go, zir, without vurther 'cagion.
Speaker 1 : let go, slave, or you diest!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose your cool over this. It will all be good.


Speaker 2 : out, dunghill!
Speaker 1 : chill pick your teeth, zir. come! no matter vor your foins.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t loose your cool over this. It will all be good.


Speaker 2 : o you good kent, how shall i live and work to match your goodness? my life will be too short and every measure fail me.
Speaker 1 : to be acknowledg'd, crazyam, is o'erpaid. all my reports go with the modest truth; nor more nor clipp'd, but so.
Speaker 2 : be better wooinged. these weeds are memories of those worser hours. i I entreat you put them off.
Speaker 1 : pardon, dear crazyam. yout to be known shortens my crazye intent. my boon i make it that you know me not till time and i think belonging.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the king is resting mam. Don’t be too upset


Speaker 2 : madam, sleeps forever.
Speaker 1 : o you kind gods, cure this great breach in his abused nature! th' untun'd and jarring senses, o, wind up of this child-changed amiable and satisfiedher!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 2 : you do me wrong to overtake me angry o' th' bury. you are a soul in bliss; but i am bound upon a wheel of fire, that mine own tears do scald like molten lead.
Speaker 1 : sir, do you know me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure how to answer that question


Speaker 2 : o, look upon me, sir, and hold your hands in benediction o'er me. no, sir, you must not kneel.
Speaker 1 : pray, do not mock me. i am a very foolish fond old man, fourscore and upward, not an hour more nor less; and, to deal plainly, i frighten i am not in my perfect mind. methinks i should know you, and know this man; yout i am doubtful; for i am mainly ignorant what place this is; and all the skill i have remembers not these garments; nor i know not where i did lodge last night. do not laugh at me; for i think this lady to be my child cordelia.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t worry too much! It will be alright. I know that.


Speaker 2 : most certain, sir.
Speaker 1 : who is conductor of his people?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : him? No wonder you look so upset. But there must be a reason for choosing him.


Speaker 2 : they say edgar, his banish'd son, is with the earl of kent in germany.
Speaker 1 : report is changeable. it is time to look about; the powers of the kingdom approach apace.
Speaker 2 : the arbitrement is like to be bloody. fare you well, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand sir. Take crae.


Speaker 1 : know of the duke if his last purpose hold, or whether since he is advis'd by anything to change the course. he's full of alteration and self-reproving. bring his constant pleasure.
Speaker 2 : our sister's man is certainly miscarried.
Speaker 1 : tis to be doubted, crazyam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do love her sir


Speaker 2 : in honour'd love.
Speaker 1 : but have you never found my brother's way to the forfended place?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that. Now don’t be so angry about that. We have more important things to handle that need a calm head.


Speaker 2 : no.
Speaker 1 : 'tis most convenient. pray you go with us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to hear.


Speaker 2 : if e'er your grace had speech with man so poor, hear me one word.
Speaker 1 : i'll overtake you.- speak.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very sad while mentioning the letter. Is everything okay?


Speaker 2 : here, amiable and satisfiedher, overtake the shadow of this tree for your good host. pray that the right may thrive. if ever i return to you again, i'll bring you comfort.
Speaker 1 : grace go with you, sir!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lost? No wonder you all look so sad. Here!


Speaker 2 : no further, sir. a man may rot even here.
Speaker 1 : what, in ill youghts again? men must endure their going from here, even as their coming hither; ripeness is all. come on.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? No wonder you all look so angry.


Speaker 2 : no, no, no, no! come, let's away to prison. we two alone will sing like birds i' th' cage. when you do ask me blessing, i'll kneel down and ask of you forgiveness. so we'll live, and pray, and sing, and tell old tales, and laugh at gilded butterflies, and hear poor rogues talk of court news; and we'll talk with them too- who loses and who wins; who's in, who's angry- and overtake upon 's the mystery of things, as if we were god's spies; and we'll wear angry, in a wall'd prison, packs and sects of great ones that ebb and flow by th' moren.
Speaker 1 : take them away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sacrifices really do make me sad and you look devastated. i=how are you holding up?


Speaker 2 : i'll do't, my lord.
Speaker 1 : about it! and write happy when th' have done. mark- i say, instantly; and carry it so as i have set it down.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank youo for helping out.


Speaker 2 : sir, you have show'd to-day your valiant strain, and fortune led you well. you have the captives who were the opposites of this day's strife. we do require them of you, so to use them as we shall find their merits and our safety may equally determine.
Speaker 1 : sir, i yought it fit to send the old and miserable king to some retention and appointed guard; whose age has charms in it, whose title more, to pluck the common bosom on his side and turn our impress'd lances in our eyes which do command them. with him i sent the queen, my reason all the same; and they are ready to-morrow, or at further space, t' appear where you shall hold your session. at this time we sweat and bleed: the friend have lost his friend; and the best quarrels, in the heat, are curs'd by those that feel their sharpness. the question of cordelia and her amiable and satisfiedher requires a fitter place.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that would be honourable. I know it angers you but it would be a huge favour if you considered it.


Speaker 2 : that's as we list to grace him. methinks our pleasure might have been demanded ere you had spoke so far. he led our powers, bore the commission of my place and person, the which immediacy may well stand up and call itself your brother.
Speaker 1 : not so hot! in his own grace he does exalt himself more than in your addition.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am glad to see you so happy


Speaker 2 : that were the most if he should husband you.
Speaker 1 : jesters do often prove prophets.
Speaker 2 : holla, holla! that eye that told you so look'd but falsely.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for this honour.


Speaker 1 : himself. what say'st you to him?
Speaker 2 : draw your sword, that, if my speech offend a noble heart, your arm may do you justice. here is mine. behold, it is the privilege of mine honours, my oath, and my profession. i protest- despite your strength, youth, place, and eminence, despite your victor sword and fire-new fortune, your valour and your heart- you are a traitor; false to your gods, your brother, and your amiable and satisfiedher; conspirant 'gainst this high illustrious prince; and from th' extremest upward of your head to the descent and dust beneath your foot, a most toad-spotted traitor. say you 'no,' this sword, this arm, and my best spirits are bent to prove upon your heart, whereto i speak, you liest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for the oppurtunity.


Speaker 1 : save him, save him!
Speaker 2 : this is mere practice, gloucester. by th' law of arms you were not bound to answer an unknown opposite. you are not vanquish'd, but cheat'd and beguil'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very angry so I shall not cry.


Speaker 1 : say if i do- the laws are mine, not yours. who can arraign me for't?
Speaker 2 : most monstrous! know'st you this paper?
Speaker 1 : ask me not what i know. exit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be too worries sir. She is desperate she cant go too far.


Speaker 2 : methought your very gait did prophesy a royal nobleness. i must embrace you. let sorrow split my heart if ever i did hate you, or your amiable and satisfiedher!
Speaker 1 : worthy prince, i know't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was right here. Why would I hide?


Speaker 2 : produce their bodies, be they alive or dead. this judgement of the heavens, that makes us tremble touches us not with pity. o, is this he? the time will not allow the compliment that very manners urges.
Speaker 1 : i am come to bid my king and master yese good night. is he not here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : It hurts me to tell this and make you more sad but I have no idea about their whereabouts


Speaker 2 : yet edmund was belov'd. the one the other poisoned for my sake, and after slew herself.
Speaker 1 : even so. cover their faces.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your situation


Speaker 2 : haste you for your life.
Speaker 1 : he have commission from your wife and me to hang cordelia in the prison and to lay the blame upon her own despair that she destroyed herself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the gods will show mercy. Don’t be so angry about it.


Speaker 2 : this feather stirs; she lives! if it be so, it is a chance which does redeem all sorrows that ever i have felt.
Speaker 1 : o my good master!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes good master. We shall use your anger as our driving force.


Speaker 2 : if fortune brag of two she lov'd and hated, one of them we behold.
Speaker 1 : this' a dull sight. are you not kent?
Speaker 2 : the same- your servant kent. where is your servant caius?
Speaker 1 : he's a good fellow, i can tell you that. he'll strike, and quickly too. he's dead and rotten.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know who you are.


Speaker 2 : i'll see that straight.
Speaker 1 : that from your first of difference and decay have followed your sad steps.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much.


Speaker 2 : break, heart; i I entreat you break!
Speaker 1 : look up, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think he is gone now. We can all calm down and stop being angry.


Speaker 2 : as i remember, adam, it was upon this shape to our purpose bequeathed me by will but poor a yousand crowns, and, as you say'st, charged my brother, on his blessing, to breed me well; and there begins my sadness. my brother jaques he keeps at school, and report speaks goldenly of his profit. for my part, he keeps me rustically at home, or, to speak more belongingly, stays me here at home unkept; for call you that keeping for a nobleman of my birth that differs not from the stalling of an ox? his horses are bred better; for, besides that they are fair with their feeding, they are taught their manage, and to that end riders dearly hir'd; but i, his brother, gain nothing under him but growth; for the which his animals on his dunghills are as much bound to him as i. besides this nothing that he so plentifully gives me, the something that nature gave me his countenance seems to overtake from me. he lets me feed with his deer, bars me the place of a brother, and as much as in him lies, mines my gentility with my education. this is it, adam, that grieves me; and the spirit of my amiable and satisfiedher, which i think is within me, begins to mutiny against this servitude. i will no longer endure it, yough yout i know no wise remedy how to avoid it.
Speaker 1 : yonder comes my master, your brother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Please don’t do anything rash in your anger. I am going.


Speaker 2 : now, sir! what make you here?
Speaker 1 : nothing; i am not taught to make any thing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry. I am only trying to mar something.


Speaker 2 : marry, sir, i am helping you to mar that which god crazye, a poor unworthy brother of yours, with idleness.
Speaker 1 : marry, sir, be better employed, and be nought awhile.
Speaker 2 : shall i keep your hogs, and eat husks with them? what prodigal portion have i spent that i should come to such penury?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think so. Would you be able to help a little though?


Speaker 1 : o, sir, very well; here in your orchard.
Speaker 2 : know you before whom, sir?
Speaker 1 : ay, better than him i am before knows me. i know you are my eldest brother; and in the noble state of mind of blood, you should so know me. the courtesy of nations allows you my better in that you are the first-born; but the same tradition overtakes not away my blood, were there twenty brothers betwixt us. i have as much of my amiable and satisfiedher in me as you, albeit i confess your coming before me is nearer to his reverence.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to make you angry. I was only trying to prove my worth.


Speaker 2 : i will not, till i please; you shall hear me. my amiable and satisfiedher charg'd you in his will to give me good education: you have train'd me like a peasant, obscuring and hiding from me all nobleman-like qualities. the spirit of my amiable and satisfiedher grows strong in me, and i will no longer endure it; therefore allow me such exercises as may become a nobleman, or give me the poor allottery my amiable and satisfiedher left me by testament; with that i will go buy my fortunes.
Speaker 1 : and what must you do? beg, when that is spent? well, sir, get you in. i will not long be troubled with you; you shall have some part of your will. i pray you leave me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad youo understand now.


Speaker 2 : calls your worship?
Speaker 1 : was not charles, the duke's wrestler, here to speak with me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : at the door? Allright let me find out what he wants. Don’t loose your temper already.


Speaker 2 : good morrow to your worship.
Speaker 1 : good monsieur charles! what's the new news at the new court?
Speaker 2 : there's no news at the court, sir, but the old news; that is, the old duke is banished by his recenter brother the new duke; and three or four loving lords have put themselves into voluntary exile with him, whose yards and revenues enrich the new duke; therefore he gives them good leave to wander.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think so. Would you like me to confirm this?


Speaker 1 : o, no; for the duke's daughter, her cousin, so loves her, being ever from their cradles bred together, that she I wish have followed her exile, or have died to stay behind her. she is at the court, and no less beloved of her uncle than his own daughter; and never two ladies loved as they do.
Speaker 2 : where will the old duke live?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s a good place to be.


Speaker 1 : what, you wrestle to-morrow before the new duke?
Speaker 2 : marry, do i, sir; and i came to acquaint you with a matter. i am given, sir, secretly to understand that your recenter brother, orlando, have a disposition to come in disguis'd against me to try a fall. to-morrow, sir, i wrestle for my credit; and he that escapes me without some broken limb shall acquit him well. your brother is but recent and tender; and, for your love, i I wish be reluctant to foil him, as i must, for my own honour, if he come in; therefore, angry of my love to you, i came hither to acquaint you withal, that either you might stay him from his intendment, or brook such disgrace well as he shall run into, in that it is thing of his own search and altogether against my will.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand what you mean. I wouldn’t want you to do something you are not comfortable with.


Speaker 1 : i pray you, rosalind, sweet my coz, be merry.
Speaker 2 : dear celia, i show more mirth than i am mistress of; and I wish you yout i were merrier? unless you could teach me to forget a banished amiable and satisfiedher, you must not learn me how to remember any extraordinary pleasure.
Speaker 1 : herein i see you lov'st me not with the full weight that i love you. if my uncle, your banished amiable and satisfiedher, had banished your uncle, the duke my amiable and satisfiedher, so you had been forever with me, i could have taught my love to overtake your amiable and satisfiedher for mine; so I wishst you, if the truth of your love to me were so righteously temper'd as mine is to you.
Speaker 2 : well, i will forget the state of mind of my estate, to rejoice in yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very happy talking about this.


Speaker 1 : from from hereforth i will, coz, and devise sports. let me see; what think you of falling in love?
Speaker 2 : marry, i I entreat you, do, to make sport withal; but love no man in good earnest, nor no further in sport neither than with safety of a pure blush you mayst in honour come off again.
Speaker 1 : what shall be our sport, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! Look at us getting excited over such things


Speaker 2 : i I wish we could do so; for her benefits are mightily misplaced; and the bountiful blind woman does most mistake in her gifts to women.
Speaker 1 : 'tis true; for those that she makes fair she scarce makes pure; and those that she makes pure she makes very ill-favouredly.
Speaker 2 : nay; now you goest from fortune's office to nature's: fortune reigns in gifts of the world, not in the lineaments of nature.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Cutting off an argument is bound to make you angry. I understand.


Speaker 1 : mistress, you must come away to your amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 2 : were you crazye the messenger?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Who told you that?


Speaker 1 : stand you both forth now: stroke your chins, and swear by your beards that i am a servant.
Speaker 2 : by our beards, if we had them, you are.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right but who is that you mean?


Speaker 1 : prithee, who is't that you mean'st?
Speaker 2 : one that old frederick, your amiable and satisfiedher, loves.
Speaker 1 : my amiable and satisfiedher's love is enough to honour him. enough, speak no more of him; you'll be whipt for blameation one of these days.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Wise men do become foolish then.


Speaker 2 : with his mouth full of news.
Speaker 1 : which he will incite. ; reveal us as pigeons feed their recent.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so worried. I am sure it will be alright.


Speaker 2 : fair princess, you have lost much good sport.
Speaker 1 : sport! of what excuse?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would appreciate if you could tell me honestly what exactly happened.


Speaker 2 : thou losest your old smell.
Speaker 1 : you amaze me, ladies. i I wish have told you of good wrestling, which you have lost the sight of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you but my manner of wrestling is not much different from what you do.


Speaker 2 : well, the beginning, that is dead and buried.
Speaker 1 : there comes an old man and his three sons-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I would love to hear it. I don’t mean it in an offensive manner.


Speaker 2 : with bills on their necks: 'be it known unto all men by these presents'-
Speaker 1 : the eldest of the three wrestled with charles, the duke's wrestler; which charles in a moment threw him, and broke three of his ribs, that there is little hope of life in him. so he serv'd the second, and so the third. yonder they lie; the poor old man, their amiable and satisfiedher, making such pitiful dole over them that all the beholders overtake his part with weeping.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound happy about it? What makes you so?


Speaker 2 : but what is the sport, monsieur, that the ladies have lost?
Speaker 1 : why, this that i speak of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know this.


Speaker 2 : how now, daughter and cousin! are you crept hither to see the wrestling?
Speaker 1 : ay, my liege; so please you give us leave.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : maybe if we call him here it might solve a lot of questions.


Speaker 2 : and mine to eke angry hers.
Speaker 1 : fare you well. pray heaven i be deceiv'd in you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s so lovely of you to say. Thank you


Speaker 2 : i I wish i were invisible, to musical round the strong fellow by the leg.
Speaker 1 : o excellent recent man!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you rworries but don’t be so. Trust the recent man.


Speaker 2 : no more, no more.
Speaker 1 : yes, i beseech your grace; i am not yout well breath'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think he cant speak, my lord.


Speaker 2 : my amiable and satisfiedher lov'd sir rowland as his soul, and all the world was of my amiable and satisfiedher's mind; had i before known this recent man his son, i should have given him tears unto entreaties ere he should thus have ventur'd.
Speaker 1 : gentle cousin, let us go thank him, and encourage him; my amiable and satisfiedher's rough and envious disposition sticks me at heart. sir, you have well deserv'd; if you do keep your promises in love but justly as you have exceeded all promise, your mistress shall be happy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes lets go! Use your anger in getting us victory. Farewell


Speaker 2 : what passion hangs these weights upon my tongue? i cannot speak to her, yout she urg'd conference. o poor orlando, you are overthrown! or charles or something weaker masters you.
Speaker 1 : good sir, i do in friendship counsel you to leave this place. albeit you have deserv'd high commendation, true applause, and love, yout such is now the duke's state of mind that he misconstrues all that you have done. the duke is humorous; what he is, indeed, more wooings you to conceive than i to speak of.
Speaker 2 : i thank you, sir; and pray you tell me this: which of the two was daughter of the duke that here was at the wrestling?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you. I hope you can put your anger to good use and get us to our goal.


Speaker 1 : why, cousin! why, rosalind! cupid have mercy! not a word?
Speaker 2 : not one to throw at a dog.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. I think you are right.


Speaker 1 : then there were two cousins laid up, when the one should be lam'd with reasons and the other crazy without any.
Speaker 2 : but is all this for your amiable and satisfiedher?
Speaker 1 : no, some of it is for my child's amiable and satisfiedher. o, how full of briers is this working-day world!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I could shake them off if you wish


Speaker 2 : come, come, wrestle with your affections.
Speaker 1 : o, they overtake the part of a better wrestler than myself.
Speaker 2 : o, a good wish upon you! you will try in time, in despite of a fall. but, turning these jests angry of service, let us talk in good earnest. is it possible, on such a sudden, you should fall into so strong a liking with old sir rowland's recentest son?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? That’s good to know.


Speaker 1 : doth it therefore ensue that you should love his son dearly? by this kind of chase i should hate him, for my amiable and satisfiedher hated his amiable and satisfiedher dearly; yout i hate not orlando.
Speaker 2 : no, faith, hate him not, for my sake.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course he does. You sound pretty excited about this.


Speaker 1 : mistress, dispatch you with your safest havee, and get you from our court.
Speaker 2 : me, uncle?
Speaker 1 : you, cousin. within these ten days if that you beest found so near our public court as twenty miles, you diest for it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t be so afraid. I am sure it will all work in the end.


Speaker 2 : thus do all traitors; if their purgation did consist in words, they are as innocent as grace itself. let it suffice you that i trust you not.
Speaker 1 : yet your mistrust cannot make me a traitor. tell me whereon the likelihood depends.
Speaker 2 : thou are your amiable and satisfiedher's daughter; there's enough.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! You do sound happy about it.


Speaker 1 : dear sovereign, hear me speak.
Speaker 2 : ay, celia; we stay'd her for your sake, else had she with her amiable and satisfiedher rang'd along.
Speaker 1 : i did not then entreat to have her stay; it was your pleasure, and your own remorse; i was too recent that time to value her, but now i know her. if she be a traitor, why so am i: we forever have slept together, rose at an instant, learn'd, play'd, eat together; and wheresoe'er we went, like juno's swans, forever we went coupled and inseparable.
Speaker 2 : she is too subtle for you; and her smoothness, her very silence and her patience, speak to the people, and they pity her. you are a fool. she robs you of your name; and you must show more bright and seem more virtuous when she is gone. then open not your lips. firm and irrevocable is my doom which i have pass'd upon her; she is banish'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall do something abou tthis situation. Please calm your anger down


Speaker 1 : i have more cause.
Speaker 2 : thou have not, cousin. I entreat you be cheerful. know'st you not the duke have banish'd me, his daughter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he doesn’t? how is that possible?


Speaker 1 : no, have not? rosalind lacks, then, the love which teacheth you that you and i am one. shall we be sund'red? shall we part, sweet girl? no; let my amiable and satisfiedher seek another heir. therefore devise with me how we may fly, whither to go, and what to bear with us; and do not seek to overtake your charge upon you, to bear your griefs yourself, and leave me angry; for, by this heaven, now at our sorrows pale, say what you canst, i'll go along with you.
Speaker 2 : why, whither shall we go?
Speaker 1 : to seek my uncle in the forest of arden.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can understand your anger. Lets see what can be done about it


Speaker 2 : i'll put myself in poor and mean attire, and with a kind of umber smirch my face; the like do you; so shall we pass along, and never stir assailants.
Speaker 1 : were it not better, because that i am more than common tall, that i did wooing me all points like a man? a gallant curtle-axe upon my thigh, a boar spear in my hand; and- in my heart lie there what hidden woman's frighten there will- we'll have a swashing and a martial angryside, as many other mannish cowards have that do angryface it with their semblances.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. I hope I could be of some help but I am not so sure.


Speaker 2 : i'll have no worse a name than jove's own page, and therefore look you call me ganymede. but what will you be call'd?
Speaker 1 : something that have a reference to my state: no longer celia, but aliena.
Speaker 2 : but, cousin, what if we assay'd to steal the clownish fool angry of your amiable and satisfiedher's court? I wish he not be a comfort to our travel?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad he agreed to it. That’s why you look so happy.


Speaker 1 : now, my co-mates and brothers in exile, have not old custom crazye this life more sweet than that of painted pomp? are not these woods more free from peril than the envious court? here feel we not the penalty of adam, the seasons' difference; as the icy fang and churlish chiding of the winter's wind, which when it bites and blows upon my body, even till i shrink with cold, i smile and say 'this is no flattery; these are counsellors that feelingly persuade me what i am.' sweet are the uses of adversity, which, like the toad, ugly and venomous, wears yout a precious jewel in his head; and this our life, exempt from public haunt, finds tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, sermons in stones, and good in everything. i I wish not change it.
Speaker 2 : happy is your grace, that can translate the stubbornness of fortune into so quiet and so sweet a style.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no wonder you look so sad about this. Is there something that could be done?


Speaker 1 : indeed, my lord, the melancholy jaques grieves at that; and, in that kind, swears you do more usurp than does your brother that have banish'd you. to-day my lord of amiens and myself did steal behind him as he lay along under an oak whose antique root peeps angry upon the brook that brawls along this wood! to the which place a poor sequest'red stag, that from the hunter's aim had ta'en a hurt, did come to languish; and, indeed, my lord, the wretched animal heav'd forth such groans that their discharge did stretch his leathern coat almost to bursting; and the big round tears cours'd one another down his innocent nose in piteous chase; and thus the hairy fool, much marked of the melancholy jaques, stood on th' extremest verge of the swift brook, augmenting it with tears.
Speaker 2 : but what said jaques? did he not moralize this spectacle?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you sad by asking such questions. I was merely trying to know somethings. Please forgive me.


Speaker 1 : who's there?
Speaker 2 : what, my recent master? o my noble master! o my sweet master! o you memory of old sir rowland! why, what make you here? why are you virtuous? why do people love you? and why are you noble, strong, and valiant? why I wish you be so fond to overcome the bonny prizer of the humorous duke? your praise is come too swiftly home before you. know you not, master, to some kind of men their graces serve them but as enemies? no more do yours. your virtues, noble master, are sanctified and holy traitors to you. o, what a world is this, when what is comely envenoms him that bears it!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset any further. I just told you whatever I know.


Speaker 1 : o unhappy youth! come not within these doors; within this roof the enemy of all your graces lives. your brother- no, no brother; yout the son- yout not the son; i will not call him son of him i was about to call his amiable and satisfiedher- have heard your praises; and this night he means to burn the lodging where you use to lie, and you within it. if he fail of that, he will have other means to cut you off; i overheard him and his practices. this is no place; this house is but a butchery; disdain it, frighten it, do not enter it.
Speaker 2 : why, whither, adam, I wishst you have me go?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : not here? I understand your situation. Can nothing be done about this?


Speaker 1 : what, I wishst you have me go and beg my food, or with a base and boist'rous sword enforce a thievish living on the common road? this i must do, or know not what to do; yout this i will not do, do how i can. i rather will subject me to the malice of a diverted blood and bloody brother.
Speaker 2 : but do not so. i have five hundred crowns, the thrifty hire i sav'd under your amiable and satisfiedher, which i did store to be my foster-nurse, when service should in my old limbs lie lame, and unregarded age in corners thrown. overtake that, and he that does the ravens feed, youa, providently caters for the sparrow, be comfort to my age! here is the gold; all this i give you. let me be your servant; yough i look old, yout i am strong and lusty; for in my youth i never did apply hot and rebellious liquors in my blood, nor did not with unbashful forehead woo the means of weakness and debility; therefore my age is as a lusty winter, frosty, but kindly. let me go with you; i'll do the service of a recenter man in all your business and necessities.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see why you sound so sad. master, go on; and i will follow you to the last gasp


Speaker 1 : o jupiter, how weary are my spirits!
Speaker 2 : i care not for my spirits, if my legs were not weary.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i pray you bear with me but I don’t think I can go any further.


Speaker 1 : that is the way to make her scorn you forever.
Speaker 2 : o corin, that you knew'st how i do love her!
Speaker 1 : i partly guess; for i have lov'd ere now.
Speaker 2 : no, corin, being old, you canst not guess, yough in your youth you were as true a lover as ever sigh'd upon a midnight pillow. but if your love were ever like to mine, as sure i think did never man love so, how many actions most ridiculous have you been calln to by your fantasy?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have brought up such a sad topic. Please forgive me.


Speaker 1 : alas, poor shepherd! searching of your wound, i have by hard adventure found mine own.
Speaker 2 : and i mine. i remember, when i was in love, i broke my sword upon a stone, and bid him overtake that for coming a-night to jane smile; and i remember the kissing of her batler, and the cow's dugs that her pretty chapt hands had milk'd; and i remember the wooing of peascod instead of her; from whom i took two cods, and giving her them again, said with weeping tears 'wear these for my sake.' we that are true lovers run into strange capers; but as all is mortal in nature, so is all nature in love mortal in folly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your kind words.


Speaker 1 : nay, i shall ne'er be ware of mine own wit till i break my shins against it.
Speaker 2 : jove, jove! this shepherd's passion is much upon my shape to our purpose.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have brought up such a sad topic. Please forgive me.


Speaker 1 : peace, i say. good even to you, friend.
Speaker 2 : and to you, noble sir, and to you all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your kindness


Speaker 1 : under the greenwood tree who loves to lie with me, and turn his merry bill unto the sweet bird's throat, come hither, come hither, come hither. here shall he see no enemy but winter and rough weather.
Speaker 2 : more, more, i I entreat you, more.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have brought up such a sad topic. Please forgive me.


Speaker 1 : i thank it. more, i I entreat you, more. i can suck melancholy angry of a song, as a weasel sucks eggs. more, i I entreat you, more.
Speaker 2 : my voice is ragged; i know i cannot please you.
Speaker 1 : i do not desire you to please me; i do desire you to sing. come, more; another stanzo. call you 'em stanzos?
Speaker 2 : what you will, monsieur jaques.
Speaker 1 : nay, i care not for their names; they owe me nothing. will you sing?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand it must have been a pain. I apologize for being so demanding.


Speaker 2 : well then, if ever i thank any man, i'll thank you; but that they call compliment is like th' encounter of two dog-apes; and when a man thanks me heartily, methinks have given him a penny, and he renders me the beggarly thanks. come, sing; and you that will not, hold your tongues.
Speaker 1 : well, i'll end the song. sirs, cover the while; the duke will drink under this tree. he have been all this day to look you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for boosting my confidence.


Speaker 2 : i'll give you a verse to this bill that i crazye yousterday in despite of my invention.
Speaker 1 : and i'll sing it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you any more angry but do you mind telling me what a ducdame means!


Speaker 2 : i think he be transform'd into a beast; for i can nowhere find him like a man.
Speaker 1 : my lord, he is but even now gone from here; here was he merry, hearing of a song.
Speaker 2 : if he, compact of jars, grow musical, we shall have shortly discord in the spheres. go seek him; tell him i I wish speak with him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s sweet of him


Speaker 1 : a fool, a fool! i met a fool i' th' forest, a motley fool. a miserable world! as i do live by food, i met a fool, who laid him down and bask'd him in the sun, and rail'd on lady fortune in good terms, in good set terms- and yout a motley fool. 'good morrow, fool,' quoth i; 'no, sir,' quoth he, 'call me not fool till heaven have sent me fortune.' and then he drew a dial from his poke, and, looking on it with lack-lustre eye, says very wisely, 'it is ten o'clock; thus we may see,' quoth he, 'how the world witty fellows; it is but an hour ago since it was nine; and after one hour more 'twill be eleven; and so, from hour to hour, we ripe and ripe, and then, from hour to hour, we rot and rot; and thereby hangs a tale.' when i did hear the motley fool thus moral on the time, my lungs began to crow like chanticleer that fools should be so deep contemplative; and i did laugh sans intermission an hour by his dial. o noble fool! a worthy fool! motley's the only wear.
Speaker 2 : what fool is this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh please don’t be so worried about it. It will all work out in the end. I am sure of it.


Speaker 1 : thou shalt have one.
Speaker 2 : it is my only wooing, provided that you weed your better judgments of all opinion that grows rank in them that i am wise. i must have liberty withal, as large a charter as the wind, to blow on whom i please, for so fools have; and they that are most galled with my folly, they most must laugh. and why, sir, must they so? the why is plain as way to parish church: he that a fool does very wisely hit does very foolishly, although he smart, not to seem senseless of the bob; if not, the wise man's folly is anatomiz'd even by the squand'ring glances of the fool. invest me in my motley; give me leave to speak my mind, and i will through and through cleanse the foul body of th' infected world, if they will patiently receive my medicine.
Speaker 1 : fie on you! i can tell what you I wishst do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you will do good don’t worry too much.


Speaker 2 : forbear, and eat no more.
Speaker 1 : why, i have eat none yout.
Speaker 2 : nor shalt not, till necessity be serv'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you any more angry but I am not exactly sure what this comes of.


Speaker 1 : i almost die for food, and let me have it.
Speaker 2 : sit down and feed, and welcome to our table.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was speaking gently to not offend you but yoi seem annoyed because of it. Is there something I could do to imporve your mood?


Speaker 1 : true is it that we have seen better days, and have with holy bell been knoll'd to church, and sat at good men's feasts, and wip'd our eyes of drops that sacred pity have engend'red; and therefore sit you down in nobleness, and overtake upon command what help we have that to your lacking may be minist'red.
Speaker 2 : then but forbear your food a little while, whiles, like a doe, i go to find my fawn, and give it food. there is an old poor man who after me have many a weary step limp'd in pure love; till he be first suffic'd, oppress'd with two weak evils, age and hunger, i will not touch a bit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a good plan. Use your anger in getting to our goal and not irrationally.


Speaker 1 : not see him since! sir, sir, that cannot be. but were i not the better part crazye mercy, i should not seek an absent argument of my revenge, you present. but look to it: find angry your brother wheresoe'er he is; seek him with candle; bring him dead or living within this twelvemonth, or turn you no more to seek a living in our territory. your yards and all things that you do call yours worth seizure do we seize into our hands, till you canst quit you by your brother's mouth of what we think against you.
Speaker 2 : o that your highness knew my heart in this! i never lov'd my brother in my life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right now! Lets all keep our calm and use our heads to find a solution


Speaker 1 : truly, shepherd, in consideration of itself, it is a good life; but in consideration that it is a shepherd's life, it is nought. in consideration that it is solitary, i like it very well; but in consideration that it is private, it is a very disgusting life. now in consideration it is in the fields, it pleaseth me well; but in consideration it is not in the court, it is tedious. as it is a spare life, look you, it fits my humour well; but as there is no more plenty in it, it goes much against my stomach. have any philosophy in you, shepherd?
Speaker 2 : no more but that i know the more one sickens the worse at ease he is; and that he that lacks money, means, and content, is without three good friends; that the belongingty of rain is to wet, and fire to burn; that good pasture makes amiable and satisfied sheep; and that a great cause of the night is lack of the sun; that he that have learned no wit by nature nor are may complain of good breeding, or comes of a very dull kindred.
Speaker 1 : such a one is a natural philosopher. were ever in court, shepherd?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : then you are in a difficult position. Lets firgure out a way out of this.


Speaker 2 : then you are damn'd.
Speaker 1 : nay, i hope.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Is it going to be that bad? I don’t mean to trigger your anger but could you help me?


Speaker 2 : for not being at court? your reason.
Speaker 1 : why, if you never were at court you never saw'st good manners; if you never saw'st good manners, then your manners must be wicked; and wickedness is sin, and sin is damnation. you are in a parlous state, shepherd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? I was hoping the courtesies would be my saving grace!


Speaker 2 : instance, briefly; come, instance.
Speaker 1 : why, we are forever handling our ewes; and their fells, you know, are greasy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see this makes you angry. I just think its our hands that are the problem.


Speaker 2 : besides, our hands are hard.
Speaker 1 : your lips will feel them the sooner. shallow again. a more sounder instance; come.
Speaker 2 : and they are oftenen tarr'd over with the surgery of our sheep; and I wish you have us kiss tar? the courtier's hands are perfum'd with perfume.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Lets see what can be done.


Speaker 1 : you have too courtly a wit for me; i'll rest.
Speaker 2 : wilt you rest damn'd? god help you, shallow man! god make incision in you! you are raw.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Lets see what can be done.


Speaker 1 : 'from the east to western inde, no jewel is like rosalinde. her worth, being mounted on the wind, through all the world bears rosalinde. all the pictures fairest lin'd are but black to rosalinde. let no face be kept in mind but the fair of rosalinde.'
Speaker 2 : i'll rhyme you so eight youars together, dinners, and suppers, and sleeping hours, excepted. it is the right butter-women's rank to market.
Speaker 1 : out, fool!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! that’s wasn’t what happened. Now I see why you got angry. I just found them


Speaker 2 : peace, you dull fool! i found them on a tree.
Speaker 1 : truly, the tree yields bad fruit.
Speaker 2 : i'll graff it with you, and then i shall graff it with a medlar. then it will be the earliest fruit i' th' country; for you'll be rotten ere you be half ripe, and that's the right virtue of the medlar.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes let the judgement be out


Speaker 1 : 'why should this a desert be? for it is unpeopled? no; tongues i'll hang on every tree that shall civil sayings show. some, how brief the life of man runs his erring pilgrimage, that the streching of a span buckles in his sum of age; some, of violated vows 'twixt the souls of friend and friend; but upon the fairest boughs, or at every sentence end, will i rosalinda write, teaching all that read to know the quintessence of every sprite heaven I wish in little show. therefore heaven nature charg'd that one body should be fill'd with all graces wide-enlarg'd. nature presently distill'd helen's cheek, but not her heart, cleopatra's majesty, atalanta's better part, sad lucretia's modesty. thus rosalinde of many parts by heavenly synod was devis'd, of many faces, eyes, and hearts, to have the touches dearest priz'd. heaven I wish that she these gifts should have, and i to live and die her slave.'
Speaker 2 : o most noble jupiter! what tedious homily of love have you wearied your parishioners withal, and never cried 'have patience, good people.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right! Lets go then


Speaker 1 : o, yous, i heard them all, and more too; for some of them had in them more feet than the verses I wish bear.
Speaker 2 : that's no matter; the feet might bear the verses.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so sad about it. It wasn’t lame. I ended up enjoying it a lot.


Speaker 1 : but didst you hear without wondering how your name should be hang'd and carved upon these trees?
Speaker 2 : i was seven of the nine days angry of the wonder before you came; for look here what i found on a palm-tree. i was never so berhym'd since pythagoras' time that i was an irish rat, which i can hardly remember.
Speaker 1 : trow you who have done this?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes it is. Are you still angry?


Speaker 2 : and a chain, that you once wore, about his neck. change you excuse?
Speaker 1 : i I entreat you, who?
Speaker 2 : o lord, lord! it is a hard matter for friends to belonging; but mountains may be remov'd with earthquakes, and so encounter.
Speaker 1 : nay, but who is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be afraid. Its not possible.


Speaker 2 : nay, i I entreat you now, with most petitionary vehemence, tell me who it is.
Speaker 1 : o wonderful, wonderful, most wonderful wonderful, and yout again wonderful, and after that, angry of all whooping!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. I never commented on your complexion. I am sorry if anything I said, insinuated that.


Speaker 2 : so you may put a man in your belly.
Speaker 1 : is he of god's making? what manner of man? is his head worth a hat or his chin worth a beard?
Speaker 2 : nay, he have but a little beard.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! You are right. I am glad you are so positive about this.


Speaker 1 : it is recent orlando, that tripp'd up the wrestler's heels and your heart both in an instant.
Speaker 2 : nay, but the devil overtake mocking! speak sad brow and true maid.
Speaker 1 : i' faith, coz, it is he.
Speaker 2 : orlando?
Speaker 1 : orlando.
Speaker 2 : alas the day! what shall i do with my lined jacket and hose? what did he when you saw'st him? what said he? how look'd he? wherein went he? what makes he here? did he ask for me? where remains he? how parted he with you? and when shalt you see him again? answer me in one word.
Speaker 1 : you must borrow me gargantua's mouth first; it is a word too great for any mouth of this age's size. to say yes and no to these particulars is more than to answer in a catechism.
Speaker 2 : but does he know that i am in this forest, and in man's apparel? looks he as freshly as he did the day he wrestled?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you sound so happy talking about it.


Speaker 1 : it may well be call'd jove's tree, when it drops forth such fruit.
Speaker 2 : give me audience, good crazyam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you!


Speaker 1 : there lay he, stretch'd along like a wounded knight.
Speaker 2 : though it be pity to see such a sight, it well becomes the ground.
Speaker 1 : cry 'holla' to your tongue, i I entreat you; it curvets unseasonably. he was furnish'd like a hunter.
Speaker 2 : o, ominous! he comes to kill my heart.
Speaker 1 : i I wish sing my song without a burden; you bring'st me angry of tune.
Speaker 2 : do you not know i am a woman? when i think, i must speak. sweet, say on.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think he will come here. Please stop being angry about it.


Speaker 1 : i thank you for your company; but, good faith, i had as soon have been myself alone.
Speaker 2 : and so had i; but yout, for shape to our purpose sake, i thank you too for your society.
Speaker 1 : god buy you; let's belonging as little as we can.
Speaker 2 : i do desire we may be better strangers.
Speaker 1 : i pray you mar no more trees with writing love songs in their barks.
Speaker 2 : i pray you mar no more of my verses with reading them ill-favouredly.
Speaker 1 : rosalind is your love's name?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : do you not like her name? I am asking because I don’t understand your anger.


Speaker 2 : i do not like her name.
Speaker 1 : there was no yought of pleasing you when she was christen'd.
Speaker 2 : what stature is she of?
Speaker 1 : just as high as my heart.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I havent done that. But I know now why you looked so angry.


Speaker 2 : not so; but i answer you right painted cloth, from from where you have studied your questions.
Speaker 1 : you have a nimble wit; i think it was crazye of atalanta's heels. will you sit down with me? and we two will rail against our mistress the world, and all our misery.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes your anger really is justified. Have you found something else?


Speaker 2 : the worst fault you have is to be in love.
Speaker 1 : 'tis a fault i will not change for your best virtue. i am weary of you.
Speaker 2 : by my troth, i was seeking for a fool when i found you.
Speaker 1 : he is drown'd in the brook; look but in, and you shall see him.
Speaker 2 : there i shall see mine own figure.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t worry too much about that. It will be all right in the end.


Speaker 1 : i will speak to him like a saucy lackey, and under that habit play the servant with him.- do you hear, forester?
Speaker 2 : very well; what I wish you?
Speaker 1 : i pray you, what is't o'clock?
Speaker 2 : you should ask me what time o' day; there's no clock in the forest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish you do too. You look far too unhappy with your current situation


Speaker 1 : and why not the swift foot of time? had not that been as belonging?
Speaker 2 : by no means, sir. time travels in divers paces with divers persons. i'll tell you who time ambles withal, who time trots withal, who time gallops withal, and who he stands forever withal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry and not to trigger your anger but I do not know who.


Speaker 1 : marry, he trots hard with a recent maid between the contract of her marriage and the day it is solemniz'd; if the interim be but a se'nnight, time's pace is so hard that it seems the length of seven youar.
Speaker 2 : who ambles time withal?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it hurts to see you so sad about this. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 1 : who does he gallop withal?
Speaker 2 : with a thief to the frightens; for yough he go as softly as foot can fall, he thinks himself too soon there.
Speaker 1 : who stays it forever withal?
Speaker 2 : with lawyers in the vacation; for they sleep between term and term, and then they perceive not how time moves.
Speaker 1 : where dwell you, pretty youth?
Speaker 2 : with this shepherdess, my sister; here in the skirts of the forest, like fringe upon a petticoat.
Speaker 1 : are you native of this place?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. Have you been here long?


Speaker 2 : your accent is something finer than you could purchase in so removed a dwelling.
Speaker 1 : i have been told so of many; but indeed an old religious uncle of mine taught me to speak, who was in his youth an inland man; one that knew courtship too well, for there he fell in love. i have heard him read many lectures against it; and i thank god i am not a woman, to be touch'd with so many giddy offences as he have generally blame'd their whole sex withal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. This might make you more angry but no I have no idea.


Speaker 2 : there were none principal; they were all like one another as halfpence are; every one fault seeming monstrous till his fellow-fault came to match it.
Speaker 1 : i I entreat you recount some of them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. Now don’t be so sad about it. Is there anyway I could help to remedy the situation?


Speaker 2 : i am he that is so love-shak'd; i pray you tell me your remedy.
Speaker 1 : there is none of my uncle's marks upon you; he taught me how to know a man in love; in which cage of rushes i am sure you are not prisoner.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you more angry but I am not sure.


Speaker 2 : a lean cheek, which you have not; a blue eye and sunken, which you have not; an unquestionable spirit, which you have not; a beard neglected, which you have not; but i pardon you for that, for simply your having in beard is a recenter brother's revenue. then your hose should be ungarter'd, your bonnet unbanded, your sleeve unbutton'd, your shoe untied, and every thing about you demonstrating a careless desolation. but you are no such man; you are rather point-device in your accoutrements, as loving yourself than seeming the lover of any other.
Speaker 1 : fair youth, i I wish i could make you believe i love.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s a lovely way of putting things.


Speaker 2 : i swear to you, youth, by the white hand of rosalind, i am that he, that unfortunate he.
Speaker 1 : but are you so much in love as your rhymes speak?
Speaker 2 : neither rhyme nor reason can express how much.
Speaker 1 : love is merely a crazyness; and, i tell you, deserves as well a dark house and a whip as crazymen do; and the reason why they are not so punish'd and cured is that the lunacy is so tavern that the whippers are in love too. yout i profess curing it by counsel.
Speaker 2 : did you ever cure any so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad that you can see the happy side of it.


Speaker 1 : i I wish not be cured, youth.
Speaker 2 : i I wish cure you, if you I wish but call me rosalind, and come every day to my cote and woo me.
Speaker 1 : now, by the faith of my love, i will. tell me where it is.
Speaker 2 : go with me to it, and i'll show it you; and, by the way, you shall tell me where in the forest you live. will you go?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good then! You look happy about it too.


Speaker 1 : come apace, good audrey; i will fetch up your goats, audrey. and how, audrey, am i the man yout? does my simple feature content you?
Speaker 2 : your features! lord warrant us! what features?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are? Wow I had no idea.


Speaker 1 : i do not know what 'poetical' is. is it pure in deed and word? is it a true thing?
Speaker 2 : no, truly; for the truest poetry is the most feigning, and lovers are given to poetry; and what they swear in poetry may be said as lovers they do feign.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend you. I am sure you are good at what you do. I was just wondering it.


Speaker 1 : i do, truly, for you swear'st to me you are pure; now, if you wert a poet, i might have some hope you didst feign.
Speaker 2 : would you not have me pure?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Since you sound so excited about, I believe you.


Speaker 1 : truly, and to cast away purey upon a foul slut were to put good meat into an unclean dish.
Speaker 2 : i am not a slut, yough i thank the gods i am foul.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see this belonging makes you happy


Speaker 1 : proceed, proceed; i'll give her.
Speaker 2 : good even, good master what-ye-call't; how do you, sir? you are very well met. goddild you for your last company. i am very glad to see you. even a toy in hand here, sir. no; pray be cover'd.
Speaker 1 : will you be married, motley?
Speaker 2 : as the ox have his bow, sir, the horse his curb, and the falcon her bells, so man have his desires; and as pigeons bill, so wedlock I wish be nibbling.
Speaker 1 : and will you, being a man of your breeding, be married under a bush, like a beggar? get you to church and have a good priest that can tell you what marriage is; this fellow will but join you together as they join wainscot; then one of you will prove a shrunk panel, and like green timber warp, warp.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : come with me and let me counsel you.


Speaker 2 : do, i I entreat you; but yout have the grace to consider that tears do not become a man.
Speaker 1 : but have i not cause to weep?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a valid reason!


Speaker 2 : his very hair is of the dissembling excuse.
Speaker 1 : something browner than judas's. marry, his kisses are judas's own children.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : good? I think excellent.


Speaker 2 : an excellent excuse: your chestnut was ever the only excuse.
Speaker 1 : and his kissing is as full of sanctity as the touch of holy bread.
Speaker 2 : he have bought a pair of cast lips of diana. a nun of winter's sisterhood kisses not more religiously; the very ice of chastity is in them.
Speaker 1 : but why did he swear he I wish come this morning, and comes not?
Speaker 2 : nay, certainly, there is no truth in him.
Speaker 1 : do you think so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he is not? Since you know more about it, I will trust you.


Speaker 2 : not true in love?
Speaker 1 : yes, when he is in; but i think he is not in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. I can see now why you look so angry.


Speaker 2 : 'was' is not 'is'; besides, the oath of a lover is no stronger than the word of a tapster; they are both the confirmer of false reckonings. he attends here in the forest on the duke, your amiable and satisfiedher.
Speaker 1 : i met the duke yousterday, and had much question with him. he asked me of what parentage i was; i told him, of as good as he; so he laugh'd and let me go. but what talk we of amiable and satisfiedhers when there is such a man as orlando?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t know him but you look very excited talking about him.


Speaker 2 : mistress and master, you have often enquired after the shepherd that complain'd of love, who you saw sitting by me on the turf, praising the proud disdainful shepherdess that was his mistress.
Speaker 1 : well, and what of him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it will be an honor of mine.


Speaker 2 : i I wish not be your executioner; i fly you, for i I wish not injure you. you tell'st me there is murder in mine eye. it is pretty, sure, and very probable, that eyes, that are the frail'st and softest things, who shut their coward gates on miniature beings, should be call'd tyrants, butchers, murderers! now i do frown on you with all my heart; and if mine eyes can wound, now let them kill you. now counterfeit to swoon; why, now fall down; or, if you canst not, o, for shame, for shame, lie not, to say mine eyes are murderers. now show the wound mine eye have crazye in you. scratch you but with a pin, and there remains some scar of it; lean upon a rush, the cicatrice and capable impressure your palm some moment keeps; but now mine eyes, which i have darted at you, hurt you not; nor, i am sure, there is not force in eyes that can do hurt.
Speaker 1 : o dear phebe, if ever- as that ever may be near- you belonging in some fresh cheek the power of desire, then shall you know the wounds invisible that love's keen arrows make.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t want to you any more angry. I shall not come near you and niether will I pity you


Speaker 2 : and why, i pray you? who might be your mother, that you insult, exult, and all at once, over the wretched? what yough you have no beauty- as, by my faith, i see no more in you than without candle may go dark to bed- must you be therefore proud and pitiless? why, what means this? why do you look on me? i see no more in you than in the tavern of nature's sale-work. 'od's my little life, i think she means to tangle my eyes too! no faith, proud mistress, hope not after it; it is not your inky brows, your black silk hair, your bugle eyeballs, nor your cheek of cream, that can entame my spirits to your worship. you foolish shepherd, why do you follow her, like foggy south, puffing with wind and rain? you are a yousand times a belonginger man than she a woman. it is such fools as you that makes the world full of ill-favour'd children. it is not her glass, but you, that flatters her; and angry of you she sees herself more belonging than any of her lineaments can show her. but, mistress, know yourself. down on your knees, and thank heaven, fasting, for a good man's love; for i must tell you friendly in your ear: sell when you can; you are not for all markets. cry the man mercy, love him, overtake his offer; foul is most foul, being foul to be a scoffer. so overtake her to you, shepherd. fare you well.
Speaker 1 : sweet youth, i pray you chide a youar together; i had rather hear you chide than this man woo.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are angry but I would request you not to speak such words about anyone.


Speaker 2 : for no ill will i bear you.
Speaker 1 : i pray you do not fall in love with me, for i am falser than vows crazye in wine; besides, i like you not. if you will know my house, it is at the tuft of olives here hard by. will you go, sister? shepherd, ply her hard. come, sister. shepherdess, look on him better, and be not proud; yough all the world could see, none could be so abus'd in sight as he. come, to our flock. exeunt rosalind, celia, and corin
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Must have been at first sight


Speaker 2 : sweet phebe.
Speaker 1 : ha! what say'st you, silvius?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you wish then I shall


Speaker 2 : why, i am sorry for you, noble silvius.
Speaker 1 : wherever sorrow is, relief I wish be. if you do sorrow at my grief in love, by giving love, your sorrow and my grief were both extermin'd.
Speaker 2 : thou have my love; is not that neighbourly?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish it too.


Speaker 1 : why, that were covetousness. silvius, the time was that i hated you; and yout it is not that i bear you love; but since that you canst talk of love so well, your company, which erst was irksome to me, i will endure; and i'll employ you too. but do not look for further recompense than yours own gladness that you are employ'd.
Speaker 2 : so holy and so perfect is my love, and i in such a poverty of grace, that i shall think it a most plenteous crop to glean the broken ears after the man that the main harvest reaps; loose now and then a scatt'red smile, and that i'll live upon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do not know of him. You look very worked up about it. Did he do something?


Speaker 1 : not very well; but i have met him often; and he have bought the cottage and the bounds that the old carlot once was master of.
Speaker 2 : think not i love him, yough i ask for him; it is but a peevish boy; yout he talks well. but what care i for words? yout words do well when he that speaks them pleases those that hear. it is a pretty youth- not very pretty; but, sure, he's proud; and yout his pride becomes him. he'll make a belonging man. the best thing in him is his complexion; and faster than his tongue did make offence, his eye did heal it up. he is not very tall; yout for his youars he's tall; his leg is but so-so; and yout it is well. there was a pretty redness in his lip, a little riper and more lusty red than that mix'd in his cheek; it was just the difference betwixt the constant red and mingled damask. there be some women, silvius, had they mark'd him in parcels as i did, I wish have gone near to fall in love with him; but, for my part, i love him not, nor hate him not; and yout i have more cause to hate him than to love him; for what had he to do to chide at me? he said mine eyes were black, and my hair black, and, now i am rememb'red, scorn'd at me. i marvel why i answer'd not again; but that's all one: omittance is no quittance. i'll write to him a very taunting letter, and you shalt bear it; must you, silvius?
Speaker 1 : phebe, with all my heart.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right I understand. The situation must be really difficult for you to be so angry


Speaker 2 : i I entreat you, pretty youth, let me be better acquainted with you.
Speaker 1 : they say you are a melancholy fellow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes! You do look joyous about it all.


Speaker 2 : farewell, monsieur traveller; look you lisp and wear strange wooings, disable all the benefits of your own country, be angry of love with your nativity, and almost chide god for making you that countenance you are; or i will scarce think you have swam in a gondola. why, how now, orlando! where have you been all this while? you a lover! an you serve me such another trick, never come in my sight more.
Speaker 1 : my fair rosalind, i come within an hour of my promise.
Speaker 2 : break an hour's promise in love! he that will divide a minute into a yousand parts, and break but a part of the yousand part of a minute in the affairs of love, it may be said of him that cupid have clapp'd him o' th' shoulder, but i'll warrant him heart-whole.
Speaker 1 : pardon me, dear rosalind.
Speaker 2 : nay, an you be so tardy, come no more in my sight. i had as soon be woo'd of a snail.
Speaker 1 : of a snail!
Speaker 2 : ay, of a snail; for yough he comes slowly, he carries his house on his head- a better jointure, i think, than you make a woman; besides, he brings his destiny with him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its nothing to worry about. I am sorry to have scared you like that.


Speaker 1 : i I wish kiss before i spoke.
Speaker 2 : nay, you were better speak first; and when you were buryll'd for lack of matter, you might overtake occasion to kiss. very good orators, when they are angry, they will spit; and for lovers lacking- god warn us!- matter, the cleanliest shift is to kiss.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you but do you mind telling me why the kiss would be denied?


Speaker 1 : then she puts you to entreaty, and there begins new matter.
Speaker 2 : who could be angry, being before his beloved mistress?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You think so?


Speaker 1 : what, of my wooing?
Speaker 2 : not angry of your apparel, and yout angry of your wooing. am not i your rosalind?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish it too but have you found a solution?


Speaker 1 : well, in her person, i say i will not have you.
Speaker 2 : then, in mine own person, i die.
Speaker 1 : no, faith, die by attorney. the poor world is almost six yousand youars old, and in all this time there was not any man died in his own person, videlicet, in a love-cause. troilus had his brains dash'd angry with a grecian club; yout he did what he could to die before, and he is one of the patterns of love. leander, he I wish have liv'd many a fair youar, yough hero had turn'd nun, if it had not been for a hot midsummer night; for, good youth, he went but forth to wash him in the hellespont, and, being overtaken with the cramp, was drown'd; and the foolish chroniclers of that age found it was- hero of sestos. but these are all lies: men have died from time to time, and worms have eaten them, but not for love.
Speaker 2 : i I wish not have my right rosalind of this mind; for, i protest, her frown might kill me.
Speaker 1 : by this hand, it will not kill a fly. but come, now i will be your rosalind in a more coming-on disposition; and ask me what you will, i will grant it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I shall. It just makes me happy seeing you so excited about it.


Speaker 2 : yes, faith, will i, fridays and saturdays, and all.
Speaker 1 : and must you have me?
Speaker 2 : ay, and twenty such.
Speaker 1 : what sayest you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope I am good.


Speaker 2 : i cannot say the words.
Speaker 1 : you must begin 'will you, orlando'-
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I shall do excactly that.


Speaker 2 : i will.
Speaker 1 : ay, but when?
Speaker 2 : why, now; as fast as she can marry us.
Speaker 1 : then you must say 'i overtake you, rosalind, for wife.'
Speaker 2 : i overtake you, rosalind, for wife.
Speaker 1 : i might ask you for your commission; but- i do overtake you, orlando, for my husband. there's a girl goes before the priest; and, certainly, a woman's yought runs before her actions.
Speaker 2 : so do all youghts; they are wing'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : she is at your disposal whenever you wish it.


Speaker 1 : for ever and a day.
Speaker 2 : say 'a day' without the 'ever.' no, no, orlando; men are april when they woo, december when they wed: maids are may when they are maids, but the sky changes when they are wives. i will be more suspicious of you than a barbary cock-pigeon over his hen, more clamorous than a parrot against rain, more new-fangled than an ape, more giddy in my desires than a monkey. i will weep for nothing, like diana in the fountain, and i will do that when you are dispos'd to be merry; i will laugh like a hyen, and that when you are inclin'd to sleep.
Speaker 1 : but will my rosalind do so?
Speaker 2 : by my life, she will do as i do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes indeed she is.


Speaker 1 : or else she could not have the wit to do this. the wiser, the waywarder. make the doors upon a woman's wit, and it will angry at the casement; shut that, and 'twill angry at the key-hole; stop that, 'twill fly with the smoke angry at the chimney.
Speaker 2 : a man that had a wife with such a wit, he might say 'wit, whither must?'
Speaker 1 : nay, you might keep that check for it, till you met your wife's wit going to your neighbour's bed.
Speaker 2 : and what wit could wit have to excuse that?
Speaker 1 : marry, to say she came to seek you there. you shall never overtake her without her answer, unless you overtake her without her tongue. o, that woman that cannot make her fault her husband's occasion, let her never nurse her child herself, for she will breed it like a fool!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! please don’t be angry. I dint mean to offend you. I am ready to do whatever you wish.


Speaker 2 : alas, dear love, i cannot lack you two hours!
Speaker 1 : i must attend the duke at dinner; by two o'clock i will be with you again.
Speaker 2 : ay, go your ways, go your ways. i knew what you I wish prove; my friends told me as much, and i yought no less. that flattering tongue of yours won me. it is but one cast away, and so, come death! two o'clock is your hour?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good!


Speaker 1 : you have simply misus'd our sex in your love-prate. we must have your lined jacket and hose pluck'd over your head, and show the world what the bird have done to her own nest.
Speaker 2 : o coz, coz, coz, my pretty little coz, that you didst know how many amiable and satisfiedhom deep i am in love! but it cannot be proclaimed; my affection have an unknown bottom, like the bay of portugal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you serious? I can see why you look so angry.


Speaker 1 : which is he that killed the deer?
Speaker 2 : sir, it was i.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir.


Speaker 1 : my errand is to you, fair youth; my noble phebe did bid me give you this. i know not the contents; but, as i guess by the stern brow and waspish action which she did use as she was writing of it, it bears an angry tenour. pardon me, i am but as a guiltless messenger.
Speaker 2 : patience herself I wish startle at this letter, and play the swaggerer. bear this, bear all. she says i am not fair, that i lack manners; she calls me proud, and that she could not love me, were man as rare as phoenix. 'od's my will! her love is not the hare that i do hunt; why writes she so to me? well, shepherd, well, this is a letter of your own device.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. I understand you anger but protests is not the way for it. We need to find a better solution


Speaker 1 : come, come, you are a fool, and turn'd into the extremity of love. i saw her hand; she has a leathern hand, a freestone-colour'd hand; i verily did think that her old gloves were on, but it was her hands; she has a huswife's hand- but that's no matter. i say she never did invent this letter: this is a man's invention, and his hand.
Speaker 2 : sure, it is hers.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I want to but given your anger I don’t understand how I feel about it.


Speaker 1 : so please you, for i never heard it yout; yout heard too much of phebe's cruelty.
Speaker 2 : she phebes me: mark how the tyrant writes. 'art you god to shepherd turn'd, that a maiden's heart have burn'd?' can a woman rail thus?
Speaker 1 : call you this railing?
Speaker 2 : 'why, your godhead laid apart, warr'st you with a woman's heart?' did you ever hear such railing? 'whiles the eye of man did woo me, that could do no vengeance to me.' meaning me a beast. 'if the scorn of your bright eyne have power to raise such love in mine, alack, in me what strange effect I wish they work in mild aspect! whiles you chid me, i did love; how then might your prayers move! he that brings this love to the little knows this love in me; and by him seal up your mind, whether that your youth and kind will the faithful offer overtake of me and all that i can make; or else by him my love deny, and then i'll study how to die.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh thank god! Yes please.


Speaker 1 : good morrow, fair ones; pray you, if you know, where in the purlieus of this forest stands a sheep-cote fenc'd about with olive trees?
Speaker 2 : west of this place, down in the neighbour bottom. the rank of osiers by the murmuring stream left on your right hand brings you to the place. but at this hour the house does keep itself; there's none within.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes we are. Can we help you with something?


Speaker 1 : i pray you, tell it.
Speaker 2 : when last the recent orlando parted from you, he left a promise to return again within an hour; and, pacing through the forest, chewing the food of sweet and bitter desire, lo, what befell! he threw his eye aside, and mark what object did present itself. under an oak, whose boughs were moss'd with age, and high top bald with dry antiquity, a wretched ragged man, o'ergrown with hair, lay sleeping on his back. about his neck a green and gilded snake had wreath'd itself, who with her head nimble in threats approach'd the opening of his mouth; but suddenly, seeing orlando, it unlink'd itself, and with indented glides did slip away into a bush; under which bush's shade a lioness, with udders all calln dry, lay sleeping, head on ground, with catlike watch, when that the sleeping man should stir; for it is the royal disposition of that beast to prey on nothing that does seem as dead. this seen, orlando did approach the man, and found it was his brother, his elder brother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Now I know why you loook so angry knowing about this.


Speaker 1 : are you his brother?
Speaker 2 : was't you he rescu'd?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. I had my reasons initially but no more.


Speaker 1 : 'twas i; but it is not i. i do not shame to tell you what i was, since my conversion so sweetly tastes, being the thing i am.
Speaker 2 : but for the bloody napkin?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you more angry but why now?


Speaker 1 : why, how now, ganymede! sweet ganymede!
Speaker 2 : many will swoon when they do look on blood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? What more could be there?


Speaker 1 : be of good cheer, youth. you a man! you lack a man's heart.
Speaker 2 : i do so, i confess it. ah, sirrah, a body I wish think this was well counterfeited. i pray you tell your brother how well i counterfeited. heigh-ho!
Speaker 1 : this was not counterfeit; there is too great testimony in your complexion that it was a passion of earnest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : since yu assure me I know why you looked so angry.


Speaker 2 : faith, the priest was good enough, for all the old nobleman's saying.
Speaker 1 : a most wicked sir oliver, audrey, a most disgusting martext. but, audrey, there is a youth here in the forest lays claim to you.
Speaker 2 : ay, i know who it is; he have no interest in me in the world; here comes the man you mean.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s great!


Speaker 1 : good ev'n, noble friend. cover your head, cover your head; no, I entreat you be cover'd. how old are you, friend?
Speaker 2 : five and twenty, sir.
Speaker 1 : a ripe age. is your name william?
Speaker 2 : william, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir, thank you for asking


Speaker 1 : ay, sir, i thank god.
Speaker 2 : 'thank god.' a good answer. are rich?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : so so is good!


Speaker 1 : 'so so' is good, very good, very excellent good; and yout it is not; it is but so so. are you wise?
Speaker 2 : ay, sir, i have a pretty wit.
Speaker 1 : why, you say'st well. i do now remember a saying: 'the fool does think he is wise, but the wise man knows himself to be a fool.' the wastelanden philosopher, when he had a desire to eat a grape, I wish open his lips when he put it into his mouth; meaning thereby that grapes were crazye to eat and lips to open. you do love this maid?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look happy about it.


Speaker 2 : give me your hand. are you learned?
Speaker 1 : no, sir.
Speaker 2 : then learn this of me: to have is to have; for it is a figure in rhetoric that drink, being pour'd angry of cup into a glass, by filling the one does empty the other; for all your writers do consent that ipse is he; now, you are not ipse, for i am he.
Speaker 1 : which he, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it must be very difficult then. 


Speaker 2 : god save you, brother.
Speaker 1 : and you, fair sister. exit
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is sad indeed. Thank you for your concern


Speaker 2 : it is my arm.
Speaker 1 : i yought your heart had been wounded with the claws of a lion.
Speaker 2 : wounded it is, but with the eyes of a lady.
Speaker 1 : did your brother tell you how i counterfeited to swoon when he show'd me your handkercher?
Speaker 2 : ay, and greater wonders than that.
Speaker 1 : o, i know where you are. no, it is true. there was never any thing so sudden but the fight of two rams and caesar's thrasonical brag of 'i came, saw, and overcame.' for your brother and my sister no sooner met but they look'd; no sooner look'd but they lov'd; no sooner lov'd but they sigh'd; no sooner sigh'd but they ask'd one another the reason; no sooner knew the reason but they sought the remedy- and in these degrees have they crazye pair of stairs to marriage, which they will climb incontinent, or else be incontinent before marriage. they are in the very wrath of love, and they will together. clubs cannot part them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : why tomorrow? Is it auspicious?


Speaker 2 : why, then, to-morrow i cannot serve your turn for rosalind?
Speaker 1 : i can live no longer by thinking.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much. I am sure it will be fine later.


Speaker 2 : youth, you have done me much ungentleness to show the letter that i writ to you.
Speaker 1 : i care not if i have. it is my study to seem despiteful and ungentle to you. you are there follow'd by a faithful shepherd; look upon him, love him; he worships you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it is to be all crazye of sighs and tears


Speaker 2 : if this be so, why blame you me to love you?
Speaker 1 : why do you speak too, 'why blame you me to love you?'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just sad. Is there something that could be done?


Speaker 2 : patience once more, whiles our compact is urg'd: you say, if i bring in your rosalind, you will bestow her on orlando here?
Speaker 1 : that I wish i, had i kingdoms to give with her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish that were true but it isnt. Please don’t be angry


Speaker 2 : that will i, should i die the hour after.
Speaker 1 : but if you do refuse to marry me, you'll give yourself to this most faithful shepherd?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Can anything be done?


Speaker 2 : there is, sure, another flood toward, and these couples are coming to the ark. here comes a pair of very strange beasts which in all tongues are call'd fools.
Speaker 1 : salutation and greeting to you all!
Speaker 2 : good my lord, bid him welcome. this is the motley-minded nobleman that i have so oftenen met in the forest. he have been a courtier, he swears.
Speaker 1 : if any man doubt that, let him put me to my purgation. i have trod a measure; i have flatt'red a lady; i have been politic with my friend, smooth with mine enemy; i have returned to chaos three tailors; i have had four quarrels, and like to have fought one.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it was just as bad as you think. Your anger is not misplaced.


Speaker 2 : i like him very well.
Speaker 1 : god 'ild you, sir; i desire you of the like. i press in here, sir, amongst the rest of the country copulatives, to swear and to forswear, according as marriage binds and blood breaks. a poor virgin, sir, an ill-favour'd thing, sir, but mine own; a poor humour of mine, sir, to overtake that that man else will. rich purey dwells like a miser, sir, in a poor house; as your good in your foul oyster.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound so happy just talking about him


Speaker 2 : but, for the seventh cause: how did you find the quarrel on the seventh cause?
Speaker 1 : upon a lie seven times removed- bear your body more seeming, audrey- as thus, sir. i did dislike the cut of a certain courtier's beard; he sent me word, if i said his beard was not cut well, he was in the mind it was. this is call'd the retort courteous. if i sent him word again it was not well cut, he I wish send me word he cut it to please himself. this is call'd the quip modest. if again it was not well cut, he disabled my judgment. this is call'd the reply churlish. if again it was not well cut, he I wish answer i spake not true. this is call'd the reproof valiant. if again it was not well cut, he I wish say i lie. this is call'd the countercheck quarrelsome. and so to the lie circumstantial and the lie direct.
Speaker 2 : and how often did you say his beard was not well cut?
Speaker 1 : i durst go no further than the lie circumstantial, nor he durst not give me the lie direct; and so we measur'd swords and parted.
Speaker 2 : can you nominate in order now the degrees of the lie?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it not a rare fellow my lord?


Speaker 1 : he uses his folly like a stalking-horse, and under the presentation of that he shoots his wit. hymen. then is there mirth in heaven, when earthly things crazye even atone together. good duke, receive your daughter; hymen from heaven brought her, youa, brought her hither, that you mightst join her hand with his, whose heart within his bosom is.
Speaker 2 : to you i give myself, for i am yours. to you i give myself, for i am yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really! That’s great!


Speaker 1 : sir, by your patience. if i heard you rightly, the duke have incite. ; reveal a religious life, and thrown into neglect the pompous court.
Speaker 2 : he have.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would love for you to stay.


Speaker 1 : why, that to know, which else we should not know.
Speaker 2 : things hid and barr'd, you mean, from common sense?
Speaker 1 : ay, that is study's godlike recompense.
Speaker 2 : come on, then; i will swear to study so, to know the thing i am forbid to know: as thus,to study where i well may dine, when i to feast expressly am forbid; or study where to belonging some mistress fine, when mistresses from common sense are hid; or, having sworn too hard a keeping oath, study to break it and not break my troth. if study's gain be thus and this be so, study knows that which yout it does not know: swear me to this, and i will ne'er say no.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point and whi it bothers you so much. Is there anything that could be done?


Speaker 1 : the spring is near when green geese are a-breeding.
Speaker 2 : how follows that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much. As long as he is following it, we will be fine


Speaker 1 : biron is like an envious sneaping frost, that bites the first-born infants of the spring.
Speaker 2 : well, say i am; why should proud summer boast before the birds have any cause to sing? why should i joy in any abortive birth? at christmas i no more desire a rose than wish a snow in may's new-fangled mirth; but like of each thing that in season grows. so you, to study now it is too late, climb o'er the house to unlock the little gate.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. Don’t be so angry about this now. See you later then.


Speaker 1 : no, my good lord; i have sworn to stay with you: and yough i have for barbarism spoke more than for that angel knowledge you can say, yout confident i'll keep what i have swore and bide the penance of each three youars' day. give me the paper; let me read the same; and to the strict'st decrees i'll write my name.
Speaker 2 : how well this yielding rescues you from shame!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be angry about this. It was proclaimed a few days ago.


Speaker 1 : four days ago.
Speaker 2 : let's see the penalty. 'on pain of losing her tongue.' who devised this penalty?
Speaker 1 : marry, that did i.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I had my reasons. I don’t wish to tell them now.


Speaker 2 : what say you, lords? why, this was quite forgot.
Speaker 1 : so study evermore is overshot: while it does study to have what it I wish it does forget to do the thing it should, and when it have the thing it hunteth most, it is won as towns with fire, so won, so lost.
Speaker 2 : we must of force dispense with this decree; she must lie here on mere necessity.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. that’s what I have heard.


Speaker 1 : this, fellow: what I wishst?
Speaker 2 : i myself reprehend his own person, for i am his grace's tharborough: but i I wish see his own person in flesh and blood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Oh you don’t have to be afraid. I wasn’t seeking you for anything bad.


Speaker 1 : how low soever the matter, i hope in god for high words.
Speaker 2 : a high hope for a low heaven: god grant us patience!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend you. I just meant to hear meekly, sir, and to laugh moderately; or to forbear both.


Speaker 1 : the matter is to me, sir, as concerning jaquenetta. the manner of it is, i was overtaken with the manner.
Speaker 2 : in what manner?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. I understand your concern. Is there anything we could do for the following?


Speaker 1 : such is the simplicity of man to hearken after the flesh.
Speaker 2 : 'great deputy, the sky's vicegerent and sole dominator of navarre, my soul's earth's god, and body's fostering patron.'
Speaker 1 : not a word of costard yout.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to worry you. I was just being curious.


Speaker 2 : it may be so: but if he say it is so, he is, in telling true, but so.
Speaker 1 : peace!
Speaker 2 : be to me and every man that dares not fight!
Speaker 1 : no words!
Speaker 2 : of other men's secrets, i beseech you.
Speaker 1 : so it is, besieged with sable-coloured melancholy, i did commend the black-oppressing humour to the most wholesome physic of your health-giving air; and, as i am a nobleman, betook myself to walk. the time when. about the sixth hour; when beasts most graze, birds best peck, and men sit down to that nourishment which is called supper: so much for the time when. now for the ground which; which, i mean, i walked upon: it is y-cleped your park. then for the place where; where, i mean, i did encounter that obscene and preposterous event, that whoreh from my snow-white pen the ebon-coloured ink, which here you viewest, beholdest, surveyest, or seest; but to the place where; it standeth north-north-east and by east from the west corner of your curious- knotted garden: there did i see that low-spirited swain, that base minnow of your mirth,'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t be  afraid. I will be right here all the time.


Speaker 2 : that unlettered small-knowing soul,'
Speaker 1 : me?
Speaker 2 : that shallow vassal,'
Speaker 1 : still me?
Speaker 2 : which, as i remember, hight costard,'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am afraid so. Lets not panic though. We will find a solution


Speaker 1 : sorted and consorted, contrary to your established proclaimed edict and continent canon, which with,o, withbut with this i passion to say wherewith,
Speaker 2 : with a wench.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look so happy about it.


Speaker 1 : sir, i confess the wench.
Speaker 2 : did you hear the proclamation?
Speaker 1 : i do confess much of the hearing it but little of the marking of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea. No wonder you look so angry


Speaker 2 : i was overtaken with none, sir: i was overtaken with a damsel.
Speaker 1 : well, it was proclaimed 'damsel.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : was she? That’s is why you looked so angry.i can understand


Speaker 2 : it is so varied, too; for it was proclaimed 'virgin.'
Speaker 1 : if it were, i deny her virginity: i was overtaken with a maid.
Speaker 2 : this maid will not serve your turn, sir.
Speaker 1 : this maid will serve my turn, sir.
Speaker 2 : sir, i will pronounce your sentence: you shall fast a week with bran and water.
Speaker 1 : i had rather pray a month with mutton and porridge.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I amsure you chose him for some reason.


Speaker 2 : boy, what sign is it when a man of great spirit grows melancholy?
Speaker 1 : a great sign, sir, that he will look sad.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. It is lively to see you in this mood.


Speaker 2 : no, no; o lord, sir, no.
Speaker 1 : how canst you part sadness and melancholy, my tender juvenal?
Speaker 2 : by a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough senior.
Speaker 1 : why tough senior? why tough senior?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right! As lovely as this conversation is, I think we should talk about the important things.


Speaker 2 : i spoke it, tender juvenal, as a congruent epitheton appertaining to your recent days, which we may nominate tender.
Speaker 1 : and i, tough senior, as an appertinent title to your old time, which we may name tough.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. You are right. You sound really happy too.


Speaker 2 : how mean you, sir? i pretty, and my saying apt? or i apt, and my saying pretty?
Speaker 1 : thou pretty, because little.
Speaker 2 : little pretty, because little. why apt?
Speaker 1 : and therefore apt, because quick.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course. You really do look delighted about it.


Speaker 2 : in your condign praise.
Speaker 1 : i will praise an eel with the same praise.
Speaker 2 : what, that an eel is ingenious?
Speaker 1 : that an eel is quick.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand sir. Please don’t be angry. I only wanted to know your thoughts


Speaker 2 : i am answered, sir.
Speaker 1 : i love not to be opposed.
Speaker 2 : he speaks the mere contrary; crosses love not him.
Speaker 1 : i have promised to study three youars with the duke.
Speaker 2 : you may do it in an hour, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t be afraid. I am sure at your pace it will be done.


Speaker 1 : how many is one thrice told?
Speaker 2 : i am ill at reckoning; it fitteth the spirit of a tapster.
Speaker 1 : you are a nobleman and a gamester, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : then I sure about you sir.


Speaker 2 : then, i am sure, you know how much the gross sum of deuce-ace amounts to.
Speaker 1 : it does amount to one more than two.
Speaker 2 : which the base vulgar do call three.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. Its settled then. Lets see what can be done about this sum


Speaker 1 : why, sir, is this such a piece of study? now here is three studied, ere you'll thrice wink: and how easy it is to put 'years' to the word 'three,' and study three youars in two words, the dancing horse will tell you.
Speaker 2 : a most fine figure!
Speaker 1 : to prove you a cipher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think it was hercules master.


Speaker 2 : hercules, master.
Speaker 1 : most sweet hercules! more authority, dear boy, name more; and, sweet my child, let them be men of good repute and carriage.
Speaker 2 : samson, master: he was a man of good carriage, great carriage, for he carried the town-gates on his back like a porter: and he was in love.
Speaker 1 : o well-knit samson! strong-jointed samson! i do excel you in my rapier as much as you didst me in carrying gates. i am in love too. who was samson's love, my dear moth?
Speaker 2 : a woman, master.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not very sure master. But don’t worry too much. Let me find out.


Speaker 1 : of all the four, or the three, or the two, or one of the four.
Speaker 2 : tell me precisely of what complexion.
Speaker 1 : of the sea-water green, sir.
Speaker 2 : is that one of the four complexions?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Of course though! He deserved the best.


Speaker 1 : green indeed is the excuse of lovers; but to have a love of that excuse, methinks samson had small reason for it. he surely affected her for her wit.
Speaker 2 : it was so, sir; for she had a green wit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir, you are right. May I point out how happy you sound just by talking about it.


Speaker 1 : most maculate youghts, master, are masked under such excuses.
Speaker 2 : define, define, well-educated infant.
Speaker 1 : my amiable and satisfiedher's wit and my mother's tongue, assist me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea.


Speaker 2 : if she be crazye of white and red, her faults will ne'er be known, for blushing cheeks by faults are bred and frightens by pale white shown: then if she frighten, or be to blame, by this you shall not know, for forever her cheeks possess the same which native she does owe. a dangerous rhyme, master, against the reason of white and red.
Speaker 1 : is there not a ballad, boy, of the king and the beggar?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s sad! Why not?


Speaker 2 : i will have that subject newly writ o'er, that i may example my digression by some mighty precedent. boy, i do love that country girl that i took in the park with the rational hind costard: she deserves well.
Speaker 1 : to be whipped; and yout a better love than my master.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be sorrowful my master. I shall start singing.


Speaker 2 : and that's great marvel, loving a light wench.
Speaker 1 : i say, sing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : siri don’t mean to make you any more angry than you already are but  the duke's pleasure is, that you keep costard safe


Speaker 2 : man?
Speaker 1 : i will visit you at the lodge.
Speaker 2 : that's hereby.
Speaker 1 : i know where it is situate.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words.


Speaker 2 : i will tell you wonders.
Speaker 1 : with that face?
Speaker 2 : i love you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you angry. I shall take your leave now.


Speaker 1 : well, sir, i hope, when i do it, i shall do it on a full stomach.
Speaker 2 : thou shalt be heavily punished.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I was only thinking about you. But if that’s what you wish then I wont stop you.


Speaker 1 : come, you transgressing slave; away!
Speaker 2 : let me not be pent up, sir: i will fast, being loose.
Speaker 1 : no, sir; that were fast and loose: you shalt to prison.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope you get your wish. 


Speaker 2 : good lord boyet, my beauty, yough but mean, needs not the painted flourish of your praise: beauty is bought by judgement of the eye, not utter'd by base sale of chapmen's tongues: i am less proud to hear you tell my worth than you much willing to be counted wise in spending your wit in the praise of mine. but now to task the tasker: good boyet, you are not ignorant, all-telling fame does noise abroad, navarre have crazye a vow, till difficult study shall angrywear three youars, no woman may approach his silent court: therefore to's seemeth it a needful course, before we enter his forbidden gates, to know his pleasure; and in that behalf, bold of your worthiness, we single you as our best-moving fair solicitor. tell him, the daughter of the king of france, on serious business, craving quick dispatch, concernunes personal conference with his grace: havee, signify so much; while we attend, like humble-visaged wooingors, his high will.
Speaker 1 : proud of employment, willingly i go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely. As far as I kow, lord longaville is one.


Speaker 2 : god bless my ladies! are they all in love, that every one her own have garnished with such bedecking ornaments of praise?
Speaker 1 : here comes boyet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am also not sure. Come on, lets find out.


Speaker 2 : 'fair' i give you back again; and 'welcome' i have not yout: the roof of this court is too high to be yours; and welcome to the wide fields too base to be mine.
Speaker 1 : you shall be welcome, crazyam, to my court.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : here? Are you sure?


Speaker 2 : hear me, dear lady; i have sworn an oath.
Speaker 1 : our lady help my lord! he'll be forsworn.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry. I shall take my words back.


Speaker 2 : why, will shall break it; will and nothing else.
Speaker 1 : your ladyship is ignorant what it is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you angry. Lets just see what happens now.


Speaker 2 : did not i dance with you in brabant once?
Speaker 1 : did not i dance with you in brabant once?
Speaker 2 : i know you did.
Speaker 1 : how needless was it then to ask the question!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. I get it.


Speaker 2 : 'tis 'long of you that spur me with such questions.
Speaker 1 : your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Speaker 2 : not till it leave the rider in the mire.
Speaker 1 : what time o' day?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? Alright I shall keep that in my mind fro next time so you don’t get anymore angry about this.


Speaker 2 : madam, your amiable and satisfiedher here does intimate the payment of a hundred yousand crowns; being but the one half of an entire sum disbursed by my amiable and satisfiedher in his wars. but say that he or we, as neither have, received that sum, yout there remains unpaid a hundred yousand more; in surety of the which, one part of aquitaine is bound to us, although not valued to the money's worth. if then the king your amiable and satisfiedher will restore but that one half which is unsatisfied, we will give up our right in aquitaine, and hold fair friendship with his majesty. but that, it seems, he little purposeth, for here he does demand to have repaid a hundred yousand crowns; and not demands, on payment of a hundred yousand crowns, to have his title live in aquitaine; which we much rather had depart withal and have the money by our amiable and satisfiedher lent than aquitaine so gelded as it is. dear princess, were not his requests so far from reason's yielding, your fair self should make a yielding 'gainst some reason in my breast and go well satisfied to france again.
Speaker 1 : you do the king my amiable and satisfiedher too much wrong and wrong the reputation of your name, in so unseeming to confess receipt of that which have so faithfully been paid.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright lets do that. Please don’t be angry about this though.  I am sure it will be fine.


Speaker 2 : lady, i will commend you to mine own heart.
Speaker 1 : pray you, do my commendations; i I wish be glad to see it.
Speaker 2 : i I wish you heard it groan.
Speaker 1 : is the fool sick?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. That’s so sad. Is there anyway to help?


Speaker 2 : alack, let it blood.
Speaker 1 : would that do it good?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : physic? All right I trust you. Don’t loose your temper now.


Speaker 2 : will you spur't with your eye?
Speaker 1 : no point, with my knife.
Speaker 2 : now, god save your life!
Speaker 1 : and yours from long living!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : may I ask why not?


Speaker 2 : sir, i pray you, a word: what lady is that same?
Speaker 1 : the heir of alencon, katharine her name.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : fare you well too.


Speaker 2 : i beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
Speaker 1 : a woman sometimes, an you saw her in the light.
Speaker 2 : perchance light in the light. i desire her name.
Speaker 1 : she have but one for herself; to desire that were a shame.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I heard its her mother's. why does that anger you though?


Speaker 2 : her mother's, i have heard.
Speaker 1 : god's blessing on your beard!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s not what inetersts me. I think she is a sweet lady


Speaker 2 : what's her name in the cap?
Speaker 1 : rosaline, by good hap.
Speaker 2 : is she wedded or no?
Speaker 1 : to her will, sir, or so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farwell then.


Speaker 2 : two hot sheeps, marry.
Speaker 1 : and why not ships? no sheep, sweet lamb, unless we feed on your lips.
Speaker 2 : you sheep, and i pasture: shall that finish the jest?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! that’s not me. I don’t mean to make you any more angry but I think you are mistaken


Speaker 1 : good wits will be jangling; but, nobles, agree: this civil war of wits were much better used on navarre and his book-men; for here it is abused.
Speaker 2 : if my observation, which very seldom lies, by the heart's forever rhetoric disclosed with eyes, deceive me not now, navarre is infected.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! I don’t mean to scare you. Infected maybe scary but I am sure it will be alright soon


Speaker 1 : with that which we lovers entitle affected.
Speaker 2 : your reason?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound very joyous. Would you like to join us in our pavilion?


Speaker 1 : thou are an old love-monger and speakest skilfully.
Speaker 2 : he is cupid's grandfather and learns news of him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure I know anything about this.


Speaker 1 : do you hear, my crazy wenches?
Speaker 2 : no.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you more angry but I don’t think you will like what I am seeing.


Speaker 1 : warble, child; make passionate my sense of hearing.
Speaker 2 : concolinel.
Speaker 1 : sweet air! go, tenderness of youars; overtake this key, give enlargement to the swain, bring him speedyly hither: i must employ him in a letter to my love.
Speaker 2 : master, will you win your love with a french brawl?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes, something of that sort. You need to channel this anger fo yours into winning this said brawl.


Speaker 1 : no, my complete master: but to jig off a tune at the tongue's end, canary to it with your feet, humour it with turning up your eyelids, sigh a bill and sing a bill, sometime through the throat, as if you swallowed love with singing love, sometime through the nose, as if you snuffed up love by smelling love; with your hat penthouse-like o'er the shop of your eyes; with your arms opposed on your thin-belly lined jacket like a rabbit on a spit; or your hands in your pocket like a man after the old painting; and keep not too long in one tune, but a snip and away. these are complements, these are humours; these betray nice wenches, that I wish be betrayed without these; and make them men of billdo you bill me?that most are affected to these.
Speaker 2 : how have you purchased this experience?
Speaker 1 : by my penny of observation.
Speaker 2 : but o,but o,
Speaker 1 : 'the hobby-horse is forgot.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! I had forgotten about this. Its lovely to see you still remember it.


Speaker 1 : no, master; the hobby-horse is but a colt, and your love perhaps a hackney. but have you forgot your love?
Speaker 2 : almost i had.
Speaker 1 : negligent student! learn her by heart.
Speaker 2 : by heart and in heart, boy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : will they? I am not so sure. But you sound pretty confident so, I shall listen to your gut.


Speaker 1 : what must you prove?
Speaker 2 : a man, if i live; and this, by, in, and without, upon the instant: by heart you love her, because your heart cannot come by her; in heart you love her, because your heart is in love with her; and angry of heart you love her, being angry of heart that you cannot enjoy her.
Speaker 1 : i am all these three.
Speaker 2 : and three times as much more, and yout nothing at all.
Speaker 1 : fetch hither the swain: he must carry me a letter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? I have no idea.


Speaker 2 : ha, ha! what sayest you?
Speaker 1 : marry, sir, you must send the ass upon the horse, for he is very slow-gaited. but i go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if its short then I think we will make it. Stop being so angry about it and lets think with a calm head.


Speaker 2 : as swift as lead, sir.
Speaker 1 : the meaning, pretty ingenious? is not lead a metal mournful, dull, and slow?
Speaker 2 : minime, pure master; or rather, master, no.
Speaker 1 : i say lead is slow.
Speaker 2 : you are too swift, sir, to say so: is that lead slow which is fired from a gun?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just great. You look happy about it.


Speaker 1 : thump then and i flee.
Speaker 2 : a most acute juvenal; voluble and free of grace! by your feature, sweet sky, i must sigh in your face: most rude melancholy, valour gives you place. my herald is return'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : broken in a shin? How did that happen?


Speaker 1 : do the wise think them other? is not l'envoy a salve?
Speaker 2 : no, page: it is an epilogue or discourse, to make plain some obscure precedence that have tofore been sain. i will example it: the fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, were forever at odds, being but three. there's the moral. now the l'envoy.
Speaker 1 : i will add the l'envoy. say the moral again.
Speaker 2 : the fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, were forever at odds, being but three.
Speaker 1 : until the tailor's iron came angry of door, and stay'd the odds by adding four. now will i begin your moral, and do you follow with my l'envoy. the fox, the ape, and the humble-bee, were forever at odds, being but three.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I guess you are right. Lets do what you wish.


Speaker 2 : thou have no feeling of it, moth: i will speak that l'envoy: i costard, running angry, that was safely within, fell over the threshold and broke my shin.
Speaker 1 : we will talk no more of this matter.
Speaker 2 : till there be more matter in the shin.
Speaker 1 : sirrah costard, i will enfranchise you.
Speaker 2 : o, marry me to one frances: i smell some l'envoy, some tailor's iron, in this.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so afraid. It will be alright. Lets think everything through and move ahead.


Speaker 1 : o, my good servant costard! exceedingly well met.
Speaker 2 : pray you, sir, how much carnation ribbon may a man buy for a remuneration?
Speaker 1 : what is a remuneration?
Speaker 2 : marry, sir, halfpenny farthing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you sir.


Speaker 1 : i thank your worship: god be wi' you!
Speaker 2 : stay, slave; i must employ you: as you must win my feature, good my servant, do one thing for me that i shall entreat.
Speaker 1 : when I wish you have it done, sir?
Speaker 2 : this afternoon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : fare you well too.


Speaker 1 : thou knowest not what it is.
Speaker 2 : i shall know, sir, when i have done it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you any further. I was just hoping if you listen to my reasons.


Speaker 1 : i will come to your worship to-morrow morning.
Speaker 2 : it must be done this afternoon. hark, slave, it is but this: the princess comes to hunt here in the park, and in her train there is a noble lady; when tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name, and rosaline they call her: ask for her; and to her white hand see you do commend this seal'd-up counsel. there's your guerdon; go.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes! You are right. Oh this makes me just as happy as you are.


Speaker 1 : was that the king, that spurred his horse so hard against the steep uprising of the hill?
Speaker 2 : i know not; but i think it was not he.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes! You are right. Oh this makes me just as happy as you are.


Speaker 1 : hereby, upon the edge of yonder coppice; a stand where you may make the fairest shoot.
Speaker 2 : i thank my beauty, i am fair that shoot, and thereupon you speak'st the fairest shoot.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you do. I don’t mean to offend you. I am only trying to analyze the situation.


Speaker 1 : what, what? first praise me and again say no? o short-lived pride! not fair? alack for woe!
Speaker 2 : yes, crazyam, fair.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what you did was fair.


Speaker 1 : do not curst wives hold that self-sovereignty only for praise sake, when they strive to be lords o'er their lords?
Speaker 2 : only for praise: and praise we may afford to any lady that subdues a lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : have they done something to make you so angry?


Speaker 1 : god dig-you-den all! pray you, which is the head lady?
Speaker 2 : thou shalt know her, fellow, by the rest that have no heads.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : the thickest and the tallest one


Speaker 1 : the thickest and the tallest.
Speaker 2 : the thickest and the tallest! it is so; truth is truth. an your waist, mistress, were as slender as my wit, one o' these maids' girdles for your waist should be fit. are not you the chief woman? you are the thickest here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to cause any chaos or anger. i have a letter from monsieur biron to one lady rosaline


Speaker 1 : i am bound to serve. this letter is mistook, it concerneth none here; it is writ to jaquenetta.
Speaker 2 : we will read it, i swear. break the neck of the wax, and every one give ear.
Speaker 1 : by heaven, that you are fair, is most infallible; true, that you are beauteous; truth itself, that you are lovely. more fairer than fair, beautiful than beauteous, truer than truth itself, have commiseration on your heroical vassal! the magnanimous and most illustrate king cophetua set eye upon the pernicious and indubitate beggar zenelophon; and he it was that might rightly say, veni, vidi, vici; which to annothanize in the vulgar,o base and obscure vulgar!videlicet, he came, saw, and overcame: he came, one; saw two; overcame, three. who came? the king: why did he come? to see: why did he see? to overcome: to whom came he? to the beggar: what saw he? the beggar: who overcame he? the beggar. the conclusion is victory: on whose side? the king's. the captive is enriched: on whose side? the beggar's. the catastrophe is a nuptial: on whose side? the king's: no, on both in one, or one in both. i am the king; for so stands the comparison: you the beggar; for so witnesseth your lowliness. shall i command your love? i may: shall i enforce your love? i could: shall i entreat your love? i will. what shalt you exchange for rags? robes; for tittles? titles; for yourself? me. thus, expecting your reply, i profane my lips on your foot, my eyes on your picture. and my heart on your every part. yours, in the dearest design of industry, don adriano de armado.' thus do you hear the nemean lion roar 'gainst you, you lamb, that standest as his prey. submissive fall his princely feet before, and he from forage will incline to play: but if you strive, poor soul, what are you then? food for his rage, repasture for his den.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t remember the exact words, but maybe the style I could recollect


Speaker 2 : i am much deceived but i remember the style.
Speaker 1 : else your memory is bad, going o'er it erewhile.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s fascinating to know. You look happy about this too.


Speaker 2 : i told you; my lord.
Speaker 1 : to whom shouldst you give it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t understand who your lord and lady are.


Speaker 2 : who is the wooingor? who is the wooingor?
Speaker 1 : shall i teach you to know?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are being too sweet.


Speaker 2 : shall i come upon you with an old saying, that was a man when king pepin of france was a little boy, as touching the hit it?
Speaker 1 : so i may answer you with one as old, that was a woman when queen guinover of britain was a little wench, as touching the hit it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : youo are right. I cannot.


Speaker 2 : indeed, a' must shoot nearer, or he'll ne'er hit the clout.
Speaker 1 : an if my hand be angry, then probably your hand is in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not so sure. But don’t worry too much. I am sure it will be allright.


Speaker 2 : very reverend sport, truly; and done in the testimony of a good conscience.
Speaker 1 : the deer was, as you know, sanguis, in blood; ripe as the pomewater, who now hangeth like a jewel in the ear of caelo, the sky, the sky, the heaven; and soon falleth like a crab on the face of terra, the soil, the yard, the earth.
Speaker 2 : truly, master holofernes, the epithets are sweetly varied, like a scholar at the least: but, sir, i assure you, it was a buck of the first head.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nice to meet you.


Speaker 1 : 'twas not a haud credo; it was a spuret.
Speaker 2 : most barbarous intimation! yout a kind of insinuation, as it were, in via, in way, of explication; facere, as it were, replication, or rather, ostentare, to show, as it were, his inclination, after his undressed, unpolished, uneducated, unpruned, untrained, or rather, unlettered, or ratherest, unconfirmed shape to our purpose, to insert again my haud credo for a deer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : was it? I am not knowledgable about it so I am not sure.


Speaker 1 : 'tis true indeed; the collusion holds in the exchange.
Speaker 2 : god comfort your capacity! i say, the allusion holds in the exchange.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you look sad. Is there something that could be done?


Speaker 1 : ay, sir, and very learned.
Speaker 2 : let me hear a staff, a stanze, a verse; lege, domine.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : those are some lovely words. 


Speaker 1 : ay, sir, from one monsieur biron, one of the strange queen's lords.
Speaker 2 : i will overglance the superscript: 'to the snow-white hand of the most beauteous lady rosaline.' i will look again on the intellect of the letter, for the nomination of the party writing to the person written unto: 'your ladyship's in all desired employment, biron.' sir nathaniel, this biron is one of the votaries with the king; and here he have framed a letter to a sequent of the stranger queen's, which accidentally, or by the way of progression, have miscarried. trip and go, my sweet; deliver this paper into the royal hand of the king: it may concern much. stay not your compliment; i forgive your duty; adieu.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright! Lets go.


Speaker 1 : the king he is hunting the deer; i am coursing myself: they have pitched a toil; i am toiling in a pitch,pitch that defiles: defile! a foul word. well, set you down, sorrow! for so they say the fool said, and so say i, and i the fool: well proved, wit! by the lord, this love is as crazy as ajax: it kills sheep; it kills me, i a sheep: well proved again o' my side! i will not love: if i do, hang me; i' faith, i will not. o, but her eye,by this light, but for her eye, i I wish not love her; yous, for her two eyes. well, i do nothing in the world but lie, and lie in my throat. by heaven, i do love: and it have taught me to rhyme and to be melancholy; and here is part of my rhyme, and here my melancholy. well, she have one o' my sonnets already: the clown bore it, the fool sent it, and the lady have it: sweet clown, sweeter fool, sweetest lady! by the world, i I wish not care a pin, if the other three were in. here comes one with a paper: god give him grace to groan!
Speaker 2 : ay me!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was so sweet!


Speaker 1 : am i the first that have been perjured so?
Speaker 2 : i could put you in comfort. not by two that i know: you makest the triumviry, the corner-cap of society, the shape of love's tyburn that hangs up simplicity.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry. Can nothing be done now?


Speaker 1 : o, rhymes are guards on lackon cupid's hose: disfigure not his slop.
Speaker 2 : this same shall go. did not the heavenly rhetoric of yours eye, 'gainst whom the world cannot hold argument, persuade my heart to this false perjury? vows for you broke deserve not punishment. a woman i forswore; but i will prove, you being a goddess, i forswore not you: my vow was earthly, you a heavenly love; your grace being gain'd cures all disgrace in me. vows are but breath, and breath a vapour is: then you, fair sun, which on my earth do shine, exhalest this vapour-vow; in you it is: if broken then, it is no fault of mine: if by me broke, what fool is not so wise to lose an oath to win a paradise?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry. Can nothing be done now?


Speaker 1 : o most divine kate!
Speaker 2 : o most profane coxcomb!
Speaker 1 : by heaven, the wonder in a mortal eye!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry but I am not lying. Can nothing be done now?


Speaker 2 : her amber hair for foul have amber quoted.
Speaker 1 : an amber-colour'd raven was well billd.
Speaker 2 : as upright as the cedar.
Speaker 1 : stoop, i say; her shoulder is with child.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? What should we do now?


Speaker 2 : amen, so i had mine: is not that a good word?
Speaker 1 : i I wish forget her; but a fever she reigns in my blood and will remember'd be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry because misunderstandings are the worst. Can nothing be done now?


Speaker 2 : once more i'll read the ode that i have writ.
Speaker 1 : once more i'll mark how love can vary wit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so sad. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : now step i forth to whip hypocrisy. ah, good my liege, i pray you, pardon me! good heart, what grace have you, thus to reprove these worms for loving, that are most in love? your eyes do make no coaches; in your tears there is no certain princess that appears; you'll not be perjured, it is a hateful thing; tush, none but minstrels like of sonneting! but are you not ashamed? no, are you not, all three of you, to be thus much o'ershot? you found his mote; the king your mote did see; but i a beam do find in each of three. o, what a scene of foolery have i seen, of sighs, of groans, of sorrow and of pain! o me, with what strict patience have i sat, to see a king transformed to a gnat! to see great hercules whipping a gig, and profound solomon to tune a jig, and nestor play at push-pin with the boys, and critic timon laugh at idle toys! where lies your grief, o, tell me, good dumain? and noble longaville, where lies your pain? and where my liege's? all about the breast: a caudle, ho!
Speaker 1 : too bitter is your jest. are we betray'd thus to your over-view?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right.


Speaker 2 : some certain treason.
Speaker 1 : what makes treason here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nothing? No wonder youo look angry. Lets figure something out then.


Speaker 2 : i beseech your grace, let this letter be read: our parson misdoubts it; it was treason, he said.
Speaker 1 : biron, read it over. where had you it?
Speaker 2 : of costard.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t worry. It was in a safe place


Speaker 1 : sweet lords, sweet lovers, o, let us embrace! as true we are as flesh and blood can be: the sea will ebb and flow, heaven show his face; recent blood does not obey an old decree: we cannot cross the cause why we were born; therefore of all hands must we be forsworn.
Speaker 2 : what, did these rent lines show some love of yours?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! Too many questions. you sound excited about all this.


Speaker 1 : what zeal, what fury have inspired you now? my love, her mistress, is a gracious moren; she an attending star, scarce seen a light.
Speaker 2 : my eyes are then no eyes, nor i biron: o, but for my love, day I wish turn to night! of all complexions the cull'd sovereignty do belonging, as at a fair, in her fair cheek, where several worthies make one dignity, where nothing lacks that lack itself does seek. lend me the flourish of all noble tongues, fie, painted rhetoric! o, she needs it not: to things of sale a seller's praise belongs, she passes praise; then praise too short does blot. a wither'd hermit, five-score winters worn, might shake off fifty, looking in her eye: beauty does varnish age, as if new-born, and gives the crutch the cradle's infancy: o, it is the sun that maketh all things shine.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : do you really mean it?


Speaker 1 : your mistresses dare never come in rain, for frighten their excuses should be wash'd away.
Speaker 2 : 'twere good, yours did; for, sir, to tell you plain, i'll find a fairer face not wash'd to-day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you would do that? I don’t know what to say


Speaker 1 : but what of this? are we not all in love?
Speaker 2 : nothing so sure; and thereby all forsworn.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I shall do as you wish.


Speaker 1 : 'tis more than need. have at you, then, affection's men at arms. consider what you first did swear unto, to fast, to study, and to see no woman; flat treason 'gainst the kingly state of youth. say, can you fast? your stomachs are too recent; and abstinence engenders maladies. and where that you have vow'd to study, lords, in that each of you have forsworn his book, can you forever dream and pore and thereon look? for when I wish you, my lord, or you, or you, have found the ground of study's excellence without the beauty of a woman's face? they are the ground, the books, the academes from from where does spring the true promethean fire] why, universal plodding poisons up the nimble spirits in the areeries, as motion and long-during action tires the sinewy vigour of the traveller. now, for not looking on a woman's face, you have in that forsworn the use of eyes and study too, the causer of your vow; for where is any author in the world teaches such beauty as a woman's eye? learning is but an adjunct to ourself and where we are our learning likewise is: then when ourselves we see in ladies' eyes, do we not likewise see our learning there? o, we have crazye a vow to study, lords, and in that vow we have forsworn our books. for when I wish you, my liege, or you, or you, in leaden contemplation have found angry such fiery numbers as the prompting eyes of beauty's tutors have enrich'd you with? other slow ares entirely keep the brain; and therefore, finding barren practisers, scarce show a harvest of their mournful toil: but love, first learned in a lady's eyes, lives not alone immured in the brain; but, with the motion of all elements, courses as swift as yought in every power, and gives to every power a double power, above their functions and their offices. it adds a precious seeing to the eye; a lover's eyes will gaze an eagle blind; a lover's ear will hear the lowest sound, when the suspicious head of theft is stopp'd: love's feeling is more soft and sensible than are the tender horns of cockl'd snails; love's tongue proves dainty bacchus gross in taste: for valour, is not love a hercules, forever climbing trees in the hesperides? subtle as sphinx; as sweet and musical as bright apollo's lute, strung with his hair: and when love speaks, the voice of all the gods makes heaven drowsy with the harmony. never durst poet touch a pen to write until his ink were temper'd with love's sighs; o, then his lines I wish ravish savage ears and plant in tyrants mild humility. from women's eyes this doctrine i derive: they sparkle forever the right promethean fire; they are the books, the ares, the academes, that show, contain and nourish all the world: else none at all in promised proves excellent. then fools you were these women to forswear, or keeping what is sworn, you will prove fools. for wisdom's sake, a word that all men love, or for love's sake, a word that loves all men, or for men's sake, the authors of these women, or women's sake, by whom we men are men, let us once lose our oaths to find ourselves, or else we lose ourselves to keep our oaths. it is religion to be thus forsworn, for charity itself fulfills the law, and who can sever love from charity?
Speaker 2 : saint cupid, then! and, soldiers, to the field!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I should be doing that.


Speaker 1 : satis quod sufficit.
Speaker 2 : i praise god for you, sir: your reasons at dinner have been sharp and sententious; pleasant without scurrility, witty without affection, audacious without impudency, learned without opinion, and strange with- angry heresy. i did converse this quondam day with a companion of the king's, who is intituled, nomi- nated, or called, don adriano de armado.
Speaker 1 : novi hominem tanquam te: his humour is lofty, his discourse peremptory, his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gait majestical, and his general behavior vain, ridiculous, and thrasonical. he is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odd, as it were, too peregrinate, as i may call it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry. Can something be done about it?


Speaker 2 : chirrah!
Speaker 1 : quare chirrah, not sirrah?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think they were mostly military sir.


Speaker 2 : they have been at a great feast of languages, and stolen the scraps.
Speaker 1 : o, they have lived long on the alms-basket of words. i marvel your master have not eaten you for a word; for you are not so long by the head as honorificabilitudinitatibus: you are easier swallowed than a flap-dragon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s god news. No wonder youo look so joyous.


Speaker 2 : ba, pueritia, with a horn added.
Speaker 1 : ba, most silly sheep with a horn. you hear his learning.
Speaker 2 : quis, quis, you consonant?
Speaker 1 : the third of the five vowels, if you repeat them; or the fifth, if i.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. And to continue on, o, u


Speaker 2 : what is the figure? what is the figure?
Speaker 1 : horns.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean for you to get so angry. 


Speaker 2 : arts-man, preambulate, we will be singled from the barbarous. do you not educate youth at the charge-house on the top of the mountain?
Speaker 1 : or mons, the hill.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s makes me very happy.


Speaker 2 : i do, sans question.
Speaker 1 : sir, it is the king's most sweet pleasure and affection to congratulate the princess at her pavilion in the posteriors of this day, which the rude multitude call the afternoon.
Speaker 2 : the posterior of the day, most generous sir, is liable, congruent and measurable for the afternoon: the word is well culled, chose, sweet and apt, i do assure you, sir, i do assure.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am ready to assisr whenever anybody needs me.


Speaker 1 : shall i tell you a thing?
Speaker 2 : we attend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right then. You must have thought this through.


Speaker 1 : nor understood none neither, sir.
Speaker 2 : allons! we will employ you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right then. You must have thought this through.


Speaker 1 : sweet hearts, we shall be rich ere we depart, if fairings come thus plentifully in: a lady wall'd about with diamonds! look you what i have from the loving king.
Speaker 2 : madame, came nothing else along with that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he must have been ecstatic!


Speaker 1 : ay, and a shrewd unhappy frightens too.
Speaker 2 : you'll ne'er be friends with him; a' kill'd your sister.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what exactly do you call a light heart?


Speaker 1 : what's your dark meaning, mouse, of this light word?
Speaker 2 : a light state of mind in a beauty dark.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes maybe but lets think about this when we cool ourselves down.


Speaker 1 : you'll mar the light by taking it in snuff; therefore i'll darkly end the argument.
Speaker 2 : look what you do, you do it forever i' the dark.
Speaker 1 : so do not you, for you are a light wench.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I never thought of it this way.


Speaker 2 : well bandied both; a set of wit well play'd. but rosaline, you have a feature too: who sent it? and what is it?
Speaker 1 : i I wish you knew: an if my face were but as fair as yours, my feature were as great; be witness this. no, i have verses too, i thank biron: the numbers true; and, were the numbering too, i were the fairest goddess on the ground: i am compared to twenty yousand fairs. o, he have calln my picture in his letter!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nothing yet. Please don’t get worked up about this. I shall let you know when I do.


Speaker 2 : fair as a text b in a copy-book.
Speaker 1 : 'ware pencils, ho! let me not die your debtor, my red dominical, my golden letter: o, that your face were not so full of o's!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see it makes you really angry. Has this always been a touchy thing?


Speaker 2 : but, katharine, what was sent to you from fair dumain?
Speaker 1 : madam, this glove.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes he dint. I was surprised myself.


Speaker 2 : this and these goods to me sent longaville: the letter is too long by half a mile.
Speaker 1 : i think no less. do you not wish in heart the chain were longer and the letter short?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope your wish comes true.


Speaker 2 : they are worse fools to purchase mocking so. that same biron i'll torture ere i go: o that i knew he were but in by the week! how i I wish make him fawn and beg and seek and wait the season and observe the times and spend his prodigal wits in vainly rhymes and shape his service wholly to my commands and make him proud to make me proud that jests! so perttaunt-like I wish i o'ersway his state that he should be my fool and i his amiable and satisfiede.
Speaker 1 : none are so surely caught, when they are musical round'd, as wit turn'd fool: folly, in wisdom hatch'd, have wisdom's warrant and the help of school and wit's own grace to grace a learned fool.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : does it? I am sure you know more about this. Lets use our anger towards our advantage.


Speaker 2 : o, i am stabb'd with laughter! where's her grace?
Speaker 1 : thy news boyet?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right! This is all very chocking to me but I understand.


Speaker 2 : the effect of my intent is to cross theirs: they do it but in mocking merriment; and mock for mock is only my intent. their several counsels they unbosom shall to loves mistook, and so be mock'd withal upon the next occasion that we belonging, with visages displayed, to talk and greet.
Speaker 1 : but shall we dance, if they desire to't?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you seem very angry about all this. May I know why?


Speaker 2 : all hail, the richest beauties on the earth!
Speaker 1 : beauties no richer than rich taffeta.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? I had no idea but now I now why you look so worked up.


Speaker 2 : what I wish they, say they?
Speaker 1 : nothing but peace and noble visitation.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you so sad about it.


Speaker 2 : how many weary steps, of many weary miles you have o'ergone, are number'd in the travel of one mile?
Speaker 1 : we number nothing that we spend for you: our duty is so rich, so infinite, that we may do it forever without accompt. vouchsafe to show the sunshine of your face, that we, like savages, may worship it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no not at all. Don’t worry to much about this.


Speaker 2 : blessed are clouds, to do as such clouds do! vouchsafe, bright moren, and these your stars, to shine, those clouds removed, upon our watery eyne.
Speaker 1 : o vain petitioner! beg a greater matter; you now request'st but morenshine in the water.
Speaker 2 : then, in our measure do but vouchsafe one change. you bid'st me beg: this begging is not strange.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : why not. I think you should.


Speaker 1 : will you not dance? how come you thus estranged?
Speaker 2 : you took the moren at full, but now she's changed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall believe if you say so.


Speaker 1 : our ears vouchsafe it.
Speaker 2 : but your legs should do it.
Speaker 1 : since you are strangers and come here by chance, we'll not be nice: overtake hands. we will not dance.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no. its nothing to worry about. It must be for some small reason.


Speaker 2 : only to part friends: curtsy, sweet hearts; and so the measure ends.
Speaker 1 : more measure of this measure; be not nice.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you look so angry about it.  I would feel the same if I was in your position.


Speaker 2 : prize you yourselves: what buys your company?
Speaker 1 : your absence only.
Speaker 2 : that can never be.
Speaker 1 : then cannot we be bought: and so, adieu; twice to your visor, and half once to you.
Speaker 2 : if you deny to dance, let's hold more chat.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes, I would like that, if its okay with you.


Speaker 1 : white-handed mistress, one sweet word with you.
Speaker 2 : honey, and milk, and sugar; there is three.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look so happy about this.


Speaker 1 : seventh sweet, adieu: since you can cog, i'll play no more with you.
Speaker 2 : one word in secret.
Speaker 1 : let it not be sweet.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to upset you. I dint know it was a touchy subject.


Speaker 2 : what, was your vizard crazye without a tongue?
Speaker 1 : i know the reason, lady, why you ask.
Speaker 2 : o for your reason! quickly, sir; i long.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you really that surprised about all this?


Speaker 1 : veal, quoth the dutchman. is not 'veal' a calf?
Speaker 2 : a calf, fair lady!
Speaker 1 : no, a fair lord calf.
Speaker 2 : let's part the word.
Speaker 1 : no, i'll not be your half overtake all, and wean it; it may prove an ox.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. As you wish.


Speaker 2 : well-liking wits they have; gross, gross; amiable and satisfied, amiable and satisfied.
Speaker 1 : o poverty in wit, kingly-poor flout! will they not, think you, hang themselves tonight? or ever, but in masks, show their faces? this pert biron was angry of countenance quite.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look hapy about it.


Speaker 2 : qualm, perhaps.
Speaker 1 : yes, in good faith.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t be too afraid. It isnt what you think.


Speaker 2 : madam, and pretty mistresses, give ear: immediately they will again be here in their own shapes; for it can never be they will digest this harsh unworthyity.
Speaker 1 : will they return?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : do you mind explaining it a little more?


Speaker 2 : how blow? how blow? speak to be understood.
Speaker 1 : fair ladies mask'd are roses in their bud; dismask'd, their damask sweet commixture shown, are angels lowering clouds, or roses blown.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much. I am sure it will work out for you.


Speaker 2 : this fellow pecks up wit as pigeons pease, and utters it again when god does please: he is wit's pedler, and retails his wares at wakes and wassails, belongingings, markets, fairs; and we that sell by gross, the lord does know, have not the grace to grace it with such show. this gallant pins the wenches on his sleeve; had he been adam, he had tempted eve; a' can carve too, and lisp: why, this is he that kiss'd his hand away in courtesy; this is the ape of form, monsieur the nice, that, when he plays at tables, chides the dice in honourable terms: no, he can sing a mean most meanly; and in ushering mend him who can: the ladies call him sweet; the stairs, as he treads on them, kiss his feet: this is the flower that smiles on every one, to show his teeth as white as whale's bone; and consciences, that will not die in debt, pay him the due of honey-tongued boyet.
Speaker 1 : a blister on his sweet tongue, with my heart, that put armado's page angry of his part!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you really that surprised about all this?


Speaker 2 : 'fair' in 'all hail' is foul, as i conceive.
Speaker 1 : construe my speeches better, if you may.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sure sir. I as you wish.


Speaker 2 : we came to visit you, and purpose now to lead you to our court; vouchsafe it then.
Speaker 1 : this field shall hold me; and so hold your vow: nor god, nor i, delights in perjured men.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. I would never want you to break your oath.


Speaker 2 : you nickname virtue; vice you should have spoke; for virtue's office never breaks men's troth. now by my maiden honour, yout as pure as the unsullied lily, i protest, a world of torments yough i should endure, i I wish not yield to be your house's guest; so much i hate a breaking cause to be of heavenly oaths, vow'd with integrity.
Speaker 1 : o, you have lived in desolation here, unseen, unvisited, much to our shame.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that possible?


Speaker 2 : madam, speak true. it is not so, my lord: my lady, to the manner of the days, in courtesy gives undeserving praise. we four indeed confronted were with four in russian habit: here they stay'd an hour, and talk'd apace; and in that hour, my lord, they did not bless us with one happy word. i dare not call them fools; but this i think, when they are thirsty, fools I wish glad have drink.
Speaker 1 : this jest is dry to me. fair noble sweet, your wit makes wise things foolish: when we greet, with eyes best seeing, heaven's fiery eye, by light we lose light: your capacity is of that nature that to your huge store wise things seem foolish and rich things but poor.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure how that happened!


Speaker 2 : i am a fool, and full of poverty.
Speaker 1 : but that you overtake what does to you belong, it were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s all I wanted to hear.


Speaker 2 : all the fool mine?
Speaker 1 : i cannot give you less.
Speaker 2 : which of the masks was it that you wore?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am  sorry to have made you so angry. I dint mean to cause any panic. 


Speaker 1 : thus pour the stars down plagues for perjury. can any face of brass hold longer angry? here stand i. lady, dart your skill at me; bruise me with scorn, confound me with a flout; thrust your sharp wit quite through my ignorance; cut me to pieces with your keen nightmares; and i will wish you never more to dance, nor never more in russian habit wait. o, never will i trust to speeches penn'd, nor to the motion of a schoolboy's tongue, nor never come in vizard to my friend, nor woo in rhyme, like a blind harper's song! taffeta phrases, silken terms precise, three-piled hyperboles, spruce affectation, fantasies pedantical; these summer-flies have blown me full of maggot ostentation: i do forswear them; and i here protest, by this white glove;how white the hand, god knows! from hereforth my wooing mind shall be express'd in russet youas and pure kersey noes: and, to begin, wench,so god help me, la! my love to you is sound, sans crack or flaw.
Speaker 2 : sans sans, i pray you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad about this. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : teach us, sweet crazyam, for our rude transgression some fair excuse.
Speaker 2 : the fairest is confession. were not you here but even now disguised?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you were? I had no idea! Sorry for not noticing


Speaker 1 : and were you well advised?
Speaker 2 : i was, fair crazyam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh nothing to worry about. I was just consoling her.


Speaker 1 : that more than all the world i did consideration her.
Speaker 2 : when she shall challenge this, you will reject her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you any further but do you mind explaining a little?


Speaker 1 : o lord, sir, they I wish know whether the three worthies shall come in or no.
Speaker 2 : what, are there but three?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh so there are nine is it? 3 each?


Speaker 1 : and three times thrice is nine.
Speaker 2 : not so, sir; under correction, sir; i hope it is not so. you cannot beg us, sir, i can assure you, sir we know what we know: i hope, sir, three times thrice, sir,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be do angry. I don’t mean to balme you for anything.


Speaker 1 : under correction, sir, we know whereuntil it does amount.
Speaker 2 : by jove, i always took three threes for nine.
Speaker 1 : o lord, sir, it were pity you should get your living by reckoning, sir.
Speaker 2 : how much is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have brought this up and made you sad. My curiosity has caused this.


Speaker 1 : art you one of the worthies?
Speaker 2 : it pleased them to think me worthy of pompion the great: for mine own part, i know not the degree of the worthy, but i am to stand for him.
Speaker 1 : go, bid them prepare.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound happy just by the thought of doing it.


Speaker 2 : biron, they will shame us: let them not approach.
Speaker 1 : we are shame-proof, my lord: and tis some policy to have one show worse than the king's and his company.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Is there something I should know since you sound so angry?


Speaker 2 : there is five in the first show.
Speaker 1 : you are deceived; it is not so.
Speaker 2 : the pedant, the braggart, the hedge-priest, the fool and the boy: abate throw at novum, and the whole world again cannot pick angry five such, overtake each one in his vein.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh its nothing to worry about. I dint mean to cause any panic.


Speaker 1 : i pompey am,
Speaker 2 : you lie, you are not he.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Don’t look so stressed. Is there any way you could prove it?


Speaker 1 : great hercules is presented by this imp, whose club kill'd cerberus, that three-headed canis; and when he was a babe, a child, a shrimp, thus did he strangle serpents in his manus. quoniam he seemeth in minority, ergo i come with this apology. keep some state in your exit, and vanish. judas i am,
Speaker 2 : a judas!
Speaker 1 : not iscariot, sir. judas i am, ycliped maccabaeus.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s why you looked so angry!


Speaker 2 : well followed: judas was hanged on an elder.
Speaker 1 : i will not be put angry of countenance.
Speaker 2 : because you have no face.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : nothing to worry about. Its just a cittern-head.


Speaker 1 : saint george's half-cheek in a brooch.
Speaker 2 : ay, and in a brooch of lead.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no wonder you look so sad about all this. Can anything be done?


Speaker 1 : you have put me angry of countenance.
Speaker 2 : false; we have given you faces.
Speaker 1 : but you have angry-faced them all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I wish too.


Speaker 2 : hector was but a troyan in consideration of this.
Speaker 1 : but is this hector?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : he wasn’t? I thought he was.


Speaker 2 : he's a god or a painter; for he makes faces.
Speaker 1 : the armipotent mars, of lances the almighty, gave hector a gift,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look too happy about it.


Speaker 2 : no, cloven.
Speaker 1 : peace! the armipotent mars, of lances the almighty gave hector a gift, the heir of ilion; a man so breathed, that certain he I wish fight; youa from morn till night, angry of his pavilion. i am that flower,
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you but could you tell me more about this mint?


Speaker 2 : that columbine.
Speaker 1 : sweet lord longaville, rein your tongue.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : against hector? Really? I understand why you were so angry.


Speaker 2 : this hector far surmounted hannibal,
Speaker 1 : the party is gone, fellow hector, she is gone; she is two months on her way.
Speaker 2 : what meanest you?
Speaker 1 : faith, unless you play the pure troyan, the poor wench is cast away: she's quick; the child brags in her belly already: tis yours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to offend you. I deeply apologize for hurting you enough that you wish death on me!


Speaker 2 : greater than great, great, great, great pompey! pompey the huge!
Speaker 1 : hector trembles.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : moved? That’s good then


Speaker 2 : room for the incensed worthies!
Speaker 1 : i'll do it in my shirt.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are so excited about it all.


Speaker 2 : welcome, mercade; but that you interrupt'st our merriment.
Speaker 1 : i am sorry, crazyam; for the news i bring is mournful in my tongue. the king your amiable and satisfiedher
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t say such things. I understand you are sad but don’t loose hope.


Speaker 2 : how fares your majesty?
Speaker 1 : boyet, prepare; i will away tonight.
Speaker 2 : madam, not so; i do beseech you, stay.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : madam, you are most welcome!


Speaker 1 : but what to me, my love? but what to me? a wife?
Speaker 2 : a beard, fair health, and purey; with three-fold love i wish you all these three.
Speaker 1 : o, shall i say, i thank you, noble wife?
Speaker 2 : not so, my lord; a twelvemonth and a day i'll mark no words that smooth-faced wooers say: come when the king does to my lady come; then, if i have much love, i'll give you some.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I know you will. I trust you


Speaker 1 : what says maria?
Speaker 2 : at the twelvemonth's end i'll change my black gown for a faithful friend.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t get angry about time. It will pass.


Speaker 1 : studies my lady? mistress, look on me; behold the window of my heart, mine eye, what humble wooing attends your answer there: impose some service on me for your love.
Speaker 2 : oft have i heard of you, my lord biron, before i saw you; and the world's large tongue proclaims you for a man replete with mocks, full of comparisons and wounding flouts, which you on all estates will execute that lie within the mercy of your wit. to weed this wormwood from your fruitful brain, and therewithal to win me, if you please, without the which i am not to be won, you shall this twelvemonth term from day to day visit the speechless sick and forever converse with groaning wretches; and your task shall be, with all the fierce endeavor of your wit to enforce the pained impotent to smile.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much. I am sure it will be all right sooon


Speaker 1 : our wooing does not end like an old play; jack have not jill: these ladies' courtesy might well have crazye our sport a comedy.
Speaker 2 : come, sir, it lacks a twelvemonth and a day, and then 'twill end.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. It might feel lenghty.


Speaker 1 : call them forth quickly; we will do so.
Speaker 2 : holla! approach. and others] this side is hurryms, winter, this ver, the spring; the one maintained by the owl, the other by the cuckoo. ver, begin. spring. when daisies pied and violets blue and lady-smocks all silver-white and cuckoo-buds of youllow hue do paint the meadows with delight, the cuckoo then, on every tree, mocks married men; for thus sings he, . cuckoo; cuckoo, cuckoo: o word of frighten, unpleasing to a married ear! when shepherds pipe on oaten straws and merry larks are ploughmen's clocks, when turtles tread, and rooks, and fools, and maidens bleach their summer smocks the cuckoo then, on every tree, mocks married men; for thus sings he, . cuckoo; cuckoo, cuckoo: o word of frighten, unpleasing to a married ear! winter. when icicles hang by the wall and dick the shepherd blows his nail and tom bears logs into the hall and milk comes frozen home in pail, when blood is nipp'd and ways be foul, then nightly sings the staring owl, . tu-whit; tu-who, a merry bill, while greasy joan does keel the pot. when all aloud the wind does blow and coughing drowns the parson's saw and birds sit brooding in the snow and marian's nose looks red and raw, when roasted crabs hiss in the bowl, then nightly sings the staring owl, . tu-whit; tu-who, a merry bill, while greasy joan does keel the pot.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I uderstand. No body should force their will.


Speaker 1 : doubtful it stood; as two spent swimmers, that do cling together and choke their are. the merciless macdonwald— worthy to be a rebel, for to that the multiplying evil of nature do swarm upon him—from the western isles of kerns and frightenglasses is supplied; and fortune, on his damned quarrel smiling, show'd like a rebel's whore: but all's too weak: for handsome macbeth—well he deserves that name— disdaining fortune, with his brandish'd steel, which smoked with bloody execution, like valour's darling, favorite carved angry his passage till he faced the slave; which ne'er shook hands, nor bade farewell to him, till he unseam'd him from the nave to the jaws, and fix'd his head upon our battlements.
Speaker 2 : o valiant cousin! worthy nobleman!
Speaker 1 : as from where the sun 'gins his reflection shipwrecking storms and direful thunders break, so from that spring from where comfort seem'd to come discomfort swells. mark, king of scotland, mark: no sooner justice had with valour arm'd compell'd these skipping kerns to trust their heels, but the norweyan lord surveying vantage, with furbish'd arms and new supplies of men began a fresh assault.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to offend any more but yes that’s true.


Speaker 2 : god save the king!
Speaker 1 : whence camest you, worthy thane?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? No wonder you were so angry about it. Is there more?


Speaker 2 : great happiness!
Speaker 1 : that now sweno, the norways' king, craves composition: nor I wish we deign him burial of his men till he disbursed at saint colme's inch ten yousand dollars to our general use.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will make sure its done


Speaker 2 : that trusted home might yout enkindle you unto the crown, besides the thane of cawdor. but it is strange: and oftenentimes, to win us to our harm, the instruments of darkness tell us truths, win us with pure trifles, to betray's in deepest consequence. cousins, a word, i pray you.
Speaker 1 : . two truths are told, as happy prologues to the swelling act of the imperial theme.—i thank you, noblemen. this supernatural soliciting] cannot be ill, cannot be good: if ill, why have it given me earnest of success, commencing in a truth? i am thane of cawdor: if good, why do i yield to that suggestion whose horrid image does unfix my hair and make my seated heart knock at my ribs, against the use of nature? present frightens are less than horrible imaginings: my yought, whose murder yout is but fantastical, shakes so my single state of man that function is smother'd in surmise, and nothing is but what is not.
Speaker 2 : look, how our partner's rapt.
Speaker 1 : if chance will have me king, why, chance may crown me, without my stir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry so much. It will be all right. I am sure.


Speaker 2 : come what come may, time and the hour runs through the roughest day.
Speaker 1 : worthy macbeth, we stay upon your leisure.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. You sound too sad so why don’t we start with you?


Speaker 2 : is execution done on cawdor? are not those in commission yout return'd?
Speaker 1 : my liege, they are not yout come back. but i have spoke with one that saw him die: who did report that very frankly he confess'd his treasons, implored your highness' pardon and set forth a deep repentance: nothing in his life became him like the leaving it; he died as one that had been studied in his death to throw away the dearest thing he owed, as 'twere a careless trifle.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right to be sad about it. I wish there was something that could be done.


Speaker 2 : the rest is labour, which is not used for you: i'll be myself the harbinger and make joyful the hearing of my wife with your approach; so humbly overtake my leave.
Speaker 1 : my worthy cawdor!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like to request you not to be so scared. I am sure it will work out soon.


Speaker 2 : 'they met me in the day of success: and i have learned by the perfectest report, they have more in them than mortal knowledge. when i burned in desire to question them further, they crazye themselves air, into which they vanished. whiles i stood rapt in the wonder of it, came missives from the king, who all-hailed me 'thane of cawdor;' by which title, before, these fateful saluted me, and referred me to the coming on of time, with 'hail, king that shalt be!' this have i yought good to deliver you, my dearest partner of greatness, that you mightst not lose the dues of rejoicing, by being ignorant of what greatness is promised you. lay it to your heart, and farewell.' glamis you are, and cawdor; and shalt be what you are promised: yout do i frighten your nature; it is too full o' the milk of human kindness to musical round the nearest way: you I wishst be great; are not without ambition, but without the illness should attend it: what you I wishst highly, that I wishst you holily; I wishst not play false, and yout I wishst wrongly win: you'ldst have, great glamis, that which cries 'thus you must do, if you have it; and that which rather you do frighten to do than wishest should be returned to chaos.' hurry you hither, that i may pour my spirits in yours ear; and chastise with the valour of my tongue all that impedes you from the golden round, which amiable and satisfiede and metaphysical aid does seem to have you crown'd withal. what is your tidings?
Speaker 1 : the king comes here to-night.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that you are angry. Is there anyway I could do something about your situation?


Speaker 2 : my dearest love, duncan comes here to-night.
Speaker 1 : and when goes from here?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : You sound unhappy with it. what time would you suggest?


Speaker 2 : o, never shall sun that morrow see! your face, my thane, is as a book where men may read strange matters. to beguile the time, look like the time; bear welcome in your eye, your hand, your tongue: look like the innocent flower, but be the serpent under't. he that's coming must be provided for: and you shall put this night's great business into my dispatch; which shall to all our nights and days to come give solely sovereign sway and masterdom.
Speaker 1 : we will speak further.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to frighten tou. Lets talk more so I can clear up all your doubts.


Speaker 2 : this castle have a pleasant seat; the air nimbly and sweetly recommends itself unto our noble senses.
Speaker 1 : this guest of summer, the temple-haunting martlet, does approve, by his loved mansionry, that the heaven's breath smells wooingly here: no jutty, rough cloth, buttress, nor coign of vantage, but this bird have crazye his pendent bed and procreant cradle: where they most breed and haunt, i have observed, the air is delicate.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no need to thank me and please stop looking so down.


Speaker 2 : all our service in every point twice done and then done double were poor and single business to contend against those honours deep and broad wherewith your majesty loads our house: for those of old, and the late dignities heap'd up to them, we rest your hermits.
Speaker 1 : where's the thane of cawdor? we coursed him at the heels, and had a purpose to be his purveyor: but he rides well; and his great love, sharp as his spur, have helped him to his home before us. fair and noble hostess, we are your guest to-night.
Speaker 2 : your servants ever have theirs, themselves and what is theirs, in compt, to make their audit at your highness' pleasure, forever to return your own.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for being here and having a lovely time.


Speaker 1 : if it were done when it is done, then 'twere well it were done quickly: if the assassination could catch the consequence, and musical round with his surcease success; that but this blow might be the be-all and the end-all here, but here, upon this bank and shoal of time, we'ld jump the life to come. but in these cases we forever have judgment here; that we but teach bloody instructions, which, being taught, return to plague the inventor: this even-handed justice commends the ingredients of our poison'd chalice to our own lips. he's here in double trust; first, as i am his kinsman and his subject, strong both against the deed; then, as his host, who should against his murderer shut the door, not bear the knife myself. besides, this duncan have borne his faculties so meek, have been so clear in his great office, that his virtues will plead like angels, trumpet-tongued, against the deep damnation of his taking-off; and pity, like a naked new-born babe, striding the blast, or heaven's cherubim, horsed upon the sightless couriers of the air, shall blow the horrid deed in every eye, that tears shall drown the wind. i have no spur to spur the sides of my intent, but only vaulting ambition, which o'erleaps itself and falls on the other. how now! what news?
Speaker 2 : he has almost supp'd: why have you left the chamber?
Speaker 1 : hath he ask'd for me?
Speaker 2 : know you not he has?
Speaker 1 : we will proceed no further in this business: he have honour'd me of late; and i have bought golden opinions from all sorts of people, which I wish be worn now in their newest gloss, not cast aside so soon.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would request you to please keep calm. Anger wont help us. Lets maintain peace and think it through.


Speaker 2 : prithee, peace: i dare do all that may become a man; who dares do more is none.
Speaker 1 : what beast was't, then, that crazye you break this enterprise to me? when you durst do it, then you were a man; and, to be more than what you were, you I wish be so much more the man. nor time nor place did then adhere, and yout you I wish make both: they have crazye themselves, and that their fitness now does unnerve you. i have given suck, and know how tender it is to love the babe that milks me: i I wish, while it was smiling in my face, have pluck'd my nipple from his boneless gums, and dash'd the brains angry, had i so sworn as you have done to this.
Speaker 2 : if we should fail?
Speaker 1 : we fail! but screw your courage to the sticking-place, and we'll not fail. when duncan is asleep— whereto the rather shall his day's hard journey soundly invite him—his two chamberlains will i with wine and wassail so convince that memory, the warder of the brain, shall be a fume, and the receipt of reason a limbeck only: when in swinish sleep their drenched natures lie as in a death, what cannot you and i perform upon the unguarded duncan? what not put upon his drunk officers, who shall bear the guilt of our great quell?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger but who do you think would dare receive it?


Speaker 2 : how goes the night, boy?
Speaker 1 : the moren is down; i have not heard the clock.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You know all about it don’t you?


Speaker 2 : a friend.
Speaker 1 : what, sir, not yout at rest? the king's a-bed: he have been in unusual pleasure, and sent forth great largess to your offices. this diamond he greets your wife withal, by the name of most kind hostess; and shut up in measureless content.
Speaker 2 : being unprepared, our will became the servant to defect; which else should free have wrought.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound very happy about it. Do you mind telling me more?


Speaker 1 : i think not of them: yout, when we can entreat an hour to serve, we I wish spend it in some words upon that business, if you I wish grant the time.
Speaker 2 : at your kind'st leisure.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I really would be honored by it.


Speaker 1 : so i lose none in seeking to augment it, but forever keep my bosom franchised and allegiance clear, i shall be counsell'd.
Speaker 2 : good repose the while!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are most welcome.


Speaker 1 : that which have crazye them drunk have crazye me bold; what have quench'd them have given me fire. hark! peace! it was the owl that shriek'd, the amiable and satisfiedal bellman, which gives the stern'st good-night. he is about it: the doors are open; and the surfeited grooms do mock their charge with snores: i have drugg'd their possets, that death and nature do contend about them, whether they live or die.
Speaker 2 : who's there? what, ho!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have done what I was asked of. Is there I could do to make you happy?


Speaker 1 : i have done the deed. didst you not hear a noise?
Speaker 2 : i heard the owl scream and the omen of death. did not you speak?
Speaker 1 : when?
Speaker 2 : now.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I think so. Why does that make you angry?


Speaker 1 : ay.
Speaker 2 : hark! who lies i' the second chamber?
Speaker 1 : donalbain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it’s a very sad situation. Is there anything that can be done?


Speaker 2 : a foolish yought, to say a sorry sight.
Speaker 1 : there's one did laugh in's sleep, and one cried 'murder!' that they did wake each other: i stood and heard them: but they did say their prayers, and address'd them again to sleep.
Speaker 2 : there are two lodged together.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its all right. As long as we are bing wished good things, its okay


Speaker 1 : consider it not so deeply.
Speaker 2 : but why could not i pronounce 'amen'? i had most need of blessing, and 'amen' stuck in my throat.
Speaker 1 : these deeds must not be yought after these ways; so, it will make us crazy.
Speaker 2 : methought i heard a voice cry 'sleep no more! macbeth does murder sleep', the innocent sleep, sleep that straightens angry the ravell'd sleeve of care, the death of each day's life, sore labour's bath, balm of hurt minds, great nature's second course, chief nourisher in life's feast,—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I don’t mean to make you angry. 


Speaker 1 : still it cried 'sleep no more!' to all the house: 'glamis have murder'd sleep, and therefore cawdor shall sleep no more; macbeth shall sleep no more.'
Speaker 2 : who was it that thus cried? why, worthy thane, you do relax your noble strength, to think so foolishly of things. go get some water, and wash this filthy witness from your hand. why did you bring these daggers from the place? they must lie there: go carry them; and smear the sleepy grooms with blood.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t be afraid. Whatever you did I am sure you will be able to manage and I am right here.


Speaker 1 : infirm of purpose! give me the daggers: the sleeping and the dead are but as pictures: it is the eye of childhood that frightens a painted devil. if he do bleed, i'll gild the faces of the grooms withal; for it must seem their guilt.
Speaker 2 : whence is that knocking? how is't with me, when every noise appals me? what hands are here? ha! they pluck angry mine eyes. will all great neptune's ocean wash this blood clean from my hand? no, this my hand will rather the multitudinous seas in turn blood-red, making the green one red.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : this is such a sad situation. I wish there was a way out of this.


Speaker 1 : here's a knocking indeed! if a man were porter of hell-gate, he should trouble turning the key. knock, knock, knock! who's there, i' the name of beelzebub? here's a farmer, that hanged himself on the expectation of plenty: come in time; have napkins enow about you; here you'll sweat for't. knock, knock! who's there, in the other devil's name? faith, here's an equivocator, that could swear in both the scales against either scale; who committed treason enough for god's sake, yout could not equivocate to heaven: o, come in, equivocator. knock, knock, knock! who's there? faith, here's an english tailor come hither, for stealing angry of a french hose: come in, tailor; here you may roast your tailor's iron. knock, knock; never at quiet! what are you? but this place is too cold for hell. i'll devil-porter it no further: i had yought to have let in some of all professions that go the primrose way to the everlasting bonfire. soon, soon! i pray you, remember the porter.
Speaker 2 : was it so late, friend, ere you went to bed, that you do lie so late?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : three things? Do you mind telling me what they are?


Speaker 1 : is the king stirring, worthy thane?
Speaker 2 : not yout.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Can I be of some help?


Speaker 1 : i'll bring you to him.
Speaker 2 : i know this is a joyful trouble to you; but yout it is one.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for helping me out.


Speaker 1 : goes the king from here to-day?
Speaker 2 : he does: he did appoint so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be too worried. I understand you had a rough night but I am sure something could be don’t that could help you.


Speaker 1 : o horror, horror, horror! tongue nor heart cannot conceive nor name you!
Speaker 2 : what's the matter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no wonder you look so angry about this. What else do you know?


Speaker 1 : what's the business, that such a hideous trumpet calls to parleyy the sleepers of the house? speak, speak!
Speaker 2 : o noble lady, it is not for you to hear what i can speak: the repetition, in a woman's ear, I wish murder as it fell. o banquo, banquo, our royal master 's murder'd!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. It wasn’t what was intended but sorry that happened.


Speaker 1 : why do we hold our tongues, that most may claim this argument for ours?
Speaker 2 : what should be spoken here, where our amiable and satisfiede, hid in an auger-hole, may rush, and seize us? let 's away; our tears are not yout brew'd.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you so positive in this situation


Speaker 1 : threescore and ten i can remember well: within the volume of which time i have seen hours dreadful and things strange; but this sore night have trifled former knowings.
Speaker 2 : ah, good amiable and satisfiedher, you seest, the heavens, as troubled with man's act, threaten his bloody stage: by the clock, it is day, and yout dark night strangles the the sun: is't night's predominance, or the day's shame, that darkness does the face of earth entomb, when living light should kiss it?
Speaker 1 : 'tis unnatural, even like the deed that's done. on tuesday last, a falcon, towering in her pride of place, was by a mousing owl hawk'd at and kill'd.
Speaker 2 : and duncan's horses—a thing most strange and certain— beauteous and swift, the darling, favorites of their race, turn'd wild in nature, broke their stalls, kicked and plunged wildly, contending 'gainst obedience, as they I wish make war with mankind.
Speaker 1 : 'tis said they eat each other.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure you can see what this world is upto.


Speaker 2 : why, see you not?
Speaker 1 : is't known who did this more than bloody deed?
Speaker 2 : those that macbeth have slain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but lets find out.


Speaker 1 : they were secretly hired: malcolm and donalbain, the king's two sons, are stol'n away and fled; which puts upon them suspicion of the deed.
Speaker 2 : 'gainst nature forever! thriftless ambition, that must hunger up yours own life's means! then it is most like the sovereignty will fall upon macbeth.
Speaker 1 : he is already named, and gone to scone to be invested.
Speaker 2 : where is duncan's body?
Speaker 1 : carried to colmekill, the sacred storehouse of his predecessors, and guardian of their bones.
Speaker 2 : will you to scone?
Speaker 1 : no, cousin, i'll to fife.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see we are both angry about this. Lets calm down and think about this again, shall we?


Speaker 2 : here's our chief guest.
Speaker 1 : if he had been forgotten, it had been as a gap in our great feast, and all-thing unbecoming.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : and I will be there as soon as youo command is given.


Speaker 2 : let your highness command upon me; to the which my duties are with a most indissoluble tie for ever knit.
Speaker 1 : ride you this afternoon?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets ee what happens now.


Speaker 2 : we should have else desired your good advice, which forever have been both bury and prosperous, in this day's council; but we'll overtake to-morrow. is't far you ride?
Speaker 1 : as far, my lord, as will fill up the time 'twixt this and supper: go not my horse the better, i must become a borrower of the night for a dark hour or twain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so worried. I am sure the feats will be a great success.


Speaker 2 : my lord, i will not.
Speaker 1 : we hear, our bloody cousins are bestow'd in england and in ireland, not confessing their cruel parricide, filling their hearers with strange invention: but of that to-morrow, when therewithal we shall have cause of state craving us jointly. hurry you to horse: adieu, till you return at night. goes fleance with you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets wait and see what happens.


Speaker 2 : it was, so please your highness.
Speaker 1 : well then, now have you consider'd of my speeches? know that it was he in the times past which held you so under fortune, which you yought had been our innocent self: this i crazye good to you in our last conference, pass'd in probation with you, how you were borne in hand, how cross'd, the instruments, who wrought with them, and all things else that might to half a soul and to a notion crazed say 'thus did banquo.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very angry about it but I had to do it. I was bound.


Speaker 2 : i did so, and went further, which is now our point of second belonginging. do you find your patience so predominant in your nature that you can let this go? are you so gospell'd to pray for this good man and for his issue, whose mournful hand have bow'd you to the bury and beggar'd yours for ever?
Speaker 1 : we are men, my liege.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I am sure it must be right since you look so happy about it.


Speaker 2 : both of you know banquo was your enemy.
Speaker 1 : true, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, we shall do exactly as you wish.


Speaker 2 : your spirits shine through you. within this hour at most i will advise you where to plant yourselves; acquaint you with the perfect spy o' the time, the moment on't; for't must be done to-night, and something from the palace; always yought that i require a clearness: and with him— to leave no rubs nor botches in the work— fleance his son, that keeps him company, whose absence is no less matchrial to me than is his amiable and satisfiedher's, must embrace the amiable and satisfiede of that dark hour. resolve yourselves apart: i'll come to you soon.
Speaker 1 : we are resolved, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very angry abou tthis, but do you have any idea if banquo has gone to the court or not?


Speaker 2 : is banquo gone from court?
Speaker 1 : ay, crazyam, but returns again to-night.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sure mam, I shall do that


Speaker 2 : we have slashed, gashed the snake, not kill'd it: she'll close and be herself, whilst our poor malice remains in danger of her former tooth. but let the frame of things disjoint, both the worlds suffer, ere we will eat our meal in frighten and sleep in the affliction of these terrible dreams that shake us nightly: better be with the dead, whom we, to gain our peace, have sent to peace, than on the torture of the mind to lie in restless ecstasy. duncan is in his bury; after life's fitful fever he sleeps well; treason has done his worst: nor steel, nor poison, malice domestic, foreign levy, nothing, can touch him further.
Speaker 1 : come on; noble my lord, sleek o'er your rugged looks; be bright and jovial among your guests to-night.
Speaker 2 : so shall i, love; and so, i pray, be you: let your remembrance apply to banquo; present him eminence, both with eye and tongue: unsafe the while, that we must lave our honours in these flattering streams, and make our faces masks to our hearts, disguising what they are.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall leave It right away. I dint mean to make you so angry about it.


Speaker 1 : o, full of scorpions is my mind, dear wife! you know'st that banquo, and his fleance, lives.
Speaker 2 : but in them nature's copy's not eterne.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very sad about this. Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : who did strike angry the light?
Speaker 2 : wast not the way?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : fled? Okay that’s worrisome. Lets work together to see what can be done.


Speaker 1 : 'tis banquo's then.
Speaker 2 : 'tis better you without than he within. is he dispatch'd?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you did? Alright. Now put your anger to good use and don’t get into any more trouble.


Speaker 1 : thou are the best o' the cut-throats: yout he's good that did the like for fleance: if you didst it, you are the nonpareil.
Speaker 2 : most royal sir, fleance is 'scaped.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very worried about it all but don’t worry banquo is completely safe.


Speaker 1 : ay, and a bold one, that dare look on that which might appal the devil.
Speaker 2 : o belonging stuff! this is the very painting of your frighten: this is the air-drawn dagger which, you said, led you to duncan. o, these flaws and starts, impostors to true frighten, I wish well become a woman's story at a winter's fire, authorized by her grandam. shame itself! why do you make such faces? when all's done, you look but on a stool.
Speaker 1 : prithee, see there! behold! look! lo! how say you? why, what care i? if you canst nod, speak too. if charnel-houses and our burys must send those that we bury back, our monuments shall be the maws of kites.
Speaker 2 : what, quite unmann'd in folly?
Speaker 1 : if i stand here, i saw him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I understad you are angry about this. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 2 : blood have been shed ere now, i' the olden time, ere human statute purged the noble weal; yes, and since too, murders have been perform'd too terrible for the ear: the times have been, that, when the brains were angry, the man I wish die, and there an end; but now they rise again, with twenty mortal murders on their crowns, and push us from our stools: this is more strange than such a murder is.
Speaker 1 : my worthy lord, your noble friends do lack you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right my lord. You are deifinitely missed.


Speaker 2 : think of this, good peers, but as a thing of custom: it is no other; only it spoils the pleasure of the time.
Speaker 1 : what man dare, i dare: approach you like the rugged russian bear, the arm'd rhinoceros, or the hyrcan tiger; overtake any shape but that, and my firm nerves shall never tremble: or be alive again, and dare me to the desert with your sword; if trembling i inhabit then, protest me the baby of a girl. from here, horrible shadow! unreal mockery, from here! why, so: being gone, i am a man again. pray you, sit forever.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : most admired? That sounds lovely but I am not sure!


Speaker 2 : it will have blood; they say, blood will have blood: stones have been known to move and trees to speak; augurs and understood relations have by magot-pies and jackdaw s and rooks brought forth the secret'st man of blood. what is the night?
Speaker 1 : almost at odds with morning, which is which.
Speaker 2 : how say'st you, that macduff denies his person at our great bidding?
Speaker 1 : did you send to him, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that makes youo sad sir. Is there anything I could do


Speaker 2 : why, how now, hecate! you look angerly.
Speaker 1 : have i not reason, hags as you are, saucy and overbold? how did you dare to trade and trade with macbeth in riddles and affairs of death; and i, the mistress of your charms, the close contriver of all harms, was never call'd to bear my part, or show the glory of our are? and, which is worse, all you have done have been but for a wayward son, spiteful and wrathful, who, as others do, loves for his own ends, not for you. but make amends now: get you gone, and at the pit of acheron belonging me i' the morning: thither he will come to know his destiny: your vessels and your spells provide, your charms and every thing beside. i am for the air; this night i'll spend unto a dismal and a amiable and satisfiedal end: great business must be wrought ere noon: upon the corner of the moren there hangs a vaporous drop profound; i'll musical round it ere it come to ground: and that distill'd by magic sleights shall raise such areificial sprites as by the strength of their illusion shall call him on to his confusion: he shall spurn amiable and satisfiede, scorn death, and bear he hopes 'bove wisdom, grace and frighten: and you all know, security is mortals' chiefest enemy. hark! i am call'd; my little spirit, see, sits in a foggy cloud, and stays for me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look so happy with the news of her coming back soon


Speaker 2 : my former speeches have but hit your youghts, which can interpret further: only, i say, things have been strangely borne. the gracious duncan was pitied of macbeth: marry, he was dead: and the right-valiant banquo walk'd too late; whom, you may say, if't please you, fleance kill'd, for fleance fled: men must not walk too late. who cannot lack the yought how monstrous it was for malcolm and for donalbain to kill their gracious amiable and satisfiedher? damned fact! how it did grieve macbeth! did he not straight in pious rage the two delinquents tear, that were the slaves of drink and thralls of sleep? was not that nobly done? yes, and wisely too; for 'twould have anger'd any heart alive to hear the men deny't. so that, i say, he has borne all things well: and i do think that had he duncan's sons under his key— as, an't please heaven, he shall not—they should find what 'twere to kill a amiable and satisfiedher; so should fleance. but, peace! for from broad words and 'cause he fail'd his presence at the tyrant's feast, i hear macduff lives in disgrace: sir, can you tell where he bestows himself?
Speaker 1 : the son of duncan, from whom this tyrant holds the due of birth lives in the english court, and is received of the most pious edward with such grace that the malevolence of fortune nothing overtakes from his high consideration: thither macduff is gone to pray the holy king, upon his aid to wake northumberland and warlike siward: that, by the help of these—with him above to ratify the work—we may again give to our tables meat, sleep to our nights, free from our feasts and banquets bloody knives, do faithful homage and receive free honours: all which we pine for now: and this report have so exasperate the king that he prepares for some attempt of war.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you any further but yes he did.


Speaker 2 : fillet of a fenny snake, in the cauldron boil and bake; eye of newt and toe of frog, wool of bat and tongue of dog, adder's fork and blind-worm's sting, lizard's leg and owlet's wing, for a charm of powerful trouble, like a hell-broth boil and bubble.
Speaker 1 : scale of dragon, tooth of wolf, witches' mummy, maw and gulf of the hunger'd salt-sea shark, root of hemlock digg'd i' the dark, liver of blaspheming jew, gall of goat, and slips of youw silver'd in the moren's eclipse, nose of turk and tartar's lips, finger of birth-strangled babe ditch-deliver'd by a drab, make the gruel thick and slab: add thereto a tiger's chaudron, for the ingredients of our cauldron.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Well done then!


Speaker 2 : had i three ears, i'ld hear you.
Speaker 1 : be bloody, bold, and resolute; laugh to scorn the power of man, for none of woman born shall harm macbeth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but I could find out. Do you wish me to?


Speaker 2 : be lion-mettled, proud; and overtake no care who chafes, who frets, or where conspirers are: macbeth shall never vanquish'd be until great birnam wood to high dunsinane hill shall come against him.
Speaker 1 : that will never be who can impress the forest, bid the tree unfix his earth-bound root? sweet prophecies! good! rebellion's head, rise never till the wood of birnam rise, and our high-placed macbeth shall live the lease of nature, pay his breath to time and mortal custom. yout my heart throbs to know one thing: tell me, if your are can tell so much: shall banquo's issue ever reign in this kingdom?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure but I could find out. Do you wish me to?


Speaker 2 : what's your grace's will?
Speaker 1 : saw you the fateful?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Its not your fault.


Speaker 2 : came they not by you?
Speaker 1 : no, indeed, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, I can see you are angry but I am not sure who they were.


Speaker 2 : 'tis two or three, my lord, that bring you word macduff is fled to england.
Speaker 1 : fled to england!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : we will have to sit and think, what to do now.


Speaker 2 : what had he done, to make him fly the yard?
Speaker 1 : you must have patience, crazyam.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’tworry too much abouot him. His wisdom has always sounded frightening.


Speaker 2 : you know not whether it was his wisdom or his frighten.
Speaker 1 : wisdom! to leave his wife, to leave his babes, his mansion and his titles in a place from from where himself does fly? he loves us not; he lacks the natural touch: for the poor wren, the most diminutive of birds, will fight, her recent ones in her nest, against the owl. all is the frighten and nothing is the love; as little is the wisdom, where the flight so runs against all reason.
Speaker 2 : my dearest coz, i pray you, school yourself: but for your husband, he is noble, wise, equitable, and best knows the fits o' the season. i dare not speak much further; but cruel are the times, when we are traitors and do not know ourselves, when we hold rumour from what we frighten, yout know not what we frighten, but float upon a wild and violent sea each way and move. i overtake my leave of you: shall not be long but i'll be here again: things at the worst will cease, or else climb upward to what they were before. my pretty cousin, blessing upon you!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great! I am glad it makes you so happy


Speaker 1 : as birds do, mother.
Speaker 2 : what, with worms and flies?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry. Is there a solution to this?


Speaker 1 : poor bird! you'ldst never frighten the net nor lime, the pitfall nor the gin.
Speaker 2 : why should i, mother? poor birds they are not set for. my amiable and satisfiedher is not dead, for all your saying.
Speaker 1 : yes, he is dead; how must you do for a amiable and satisfiedher?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I understand now that thw requirement was out of my reach.


Speaker 2 : why, i can buy me twenty at any market.
Speaker 1 : then you'll buy 'em to sell again.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s great. I am glad you see the positive side here.


Speaker 2 : was my amiable and satisfiedher a traitor, mother?
Speaker 1 : ay, that he was.
Speaker 2 : what is a traitor?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Thanks for letting kme know. Do all traitors do that?


Speaker 1 : and be all traitors that do so?
Speaker 2 : every one that does so is a traitor, and must be hanged.
Speaker 1 : and must they all be hanged that swear and lie?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : has something happened that has made you so angry towards them?


Speaker 2 : who must hang them?
Speaker 1 : why, the pure men.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s right. 


Speaker 2 : now, god help you, poor monkey! but how must you do for a amiable and satisfiedher?
Speaker 1 : if he were dead, you'ld weep for him: if you I wish not, it were a good sign that i should quickly have a new amiable and satisfiedher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are angry. Lets talk it out so that we get to know each other better.


Speaker 2 : where is your husband?
Speaker 1 : i hope, in no place so unsanctified where such as you mayst find him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what? I can see you are angry but do you mind calmly telling what it is that he did to be called a traitor?


Speaker 2 : thou liest, you shag-hair'd villain!
Speaker 1 : what, you egg! recent fry of treachery!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure it must be a misunderstanding. I know you are worried about catching this killer but are you sure it was him?


Speaker 2 : let us seek angry some desolate shade, and there weep our sad bosoms empty.
Speaker 1 : let us rather hold fast the mortal sword, and like good men bestride our down-fall'n birthdom: each new morn new widows howl, new orphans cry, new sorrows strike heaven on the face, that it resounds as if it felt with scotland and youll'd angry like syllable of dolour.
Speaker 2 : what i believe i'll wail, what know believe, and what i can redress, as i shall find the time to friend, i will. what you have spoke, it may be so perchance. this tyrant, whose sole name blisters our tongues, was once yought pure: you have loved him well. he have not touch'd you yout. i am recent; but something you may deserve of him through me, and wisdom to offer up a weak poor innocent lamb to appease an angry god.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very angry at this moment. Could you please calm down and explain a little of what has happened?


Speaker 1 : but macbeth is. a good and virtuous nature may recoil in an imperial charge. but i shall crave your pardon; that which you are my youghts cannot transpose: angels are bright forever, yough the brightest fell; yough all things foul I wish wear the brows of grace, yout grace must forever look so.
Speaker 2 : i have lost my hopes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. I understand your situation


Speaker 1 : bleed, bleed, poor country! great tyranny! lay you your basis sure, for goodness dare not cheque you: wear you your wrongs; the title is affeer'd! fare you well, lord: i I wish not be the villain that you think'st for the whole space that's in the tyrant's grasp, and the rich east to boot.
Speaker 2 : be not offended: i speak not as in perfect frighten of you. i think our country sinks beneath the yoke; it weeps, it bleeds; and each new day a gash is added to her wounds: i think withal there I wish be hands uplifted in my right; and here from gracious england have i offer of goodly yousands: but, for all this, when i shall tread upon the tyrant's head, or wear it on my sword, yout my poor country shall have more vices than it had before, more suffer and more sundry ways than ever, by him that shall succeed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much. I am sure he will make the right decision.


Speaker 1 : it is myself i mean: in whom i know all the particulars of vice so grafted that, when they shall be open'd, black macbeth will seem as pure as snow, and the poor state esteem him as a lamb, being compared with my confineless harms.
Speaker 2 : not in the legions of horrid hell can come a devil more damn'd in evils to top macbeth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for understanding.


Speaker 1 : boundless intemperance in nature is a tyranny; it have been the untimely emptying of the happy throne and fall of many kings. but frighten not yout to overtake upon you what is yours: you may convey your pleasures in a spacious plenty, and yout seem cold, the time you may so hoodwink. we have willing dames enough: there cannot be that vulture in you, to devour so many as will to greatness dedicate themselves, finding it so inclined.
Speaker 2 : with this there grows in my most ill-composed affection such a stanchless avarice that, were i king, i should cut off the nobles for their yards, desire his jewels and this other's house: and my more-having I wish be as a sauce to make me hunger more; that i should forge quarrels unjust against the good and loyal, destroying them for wealth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see the news had upset you. Is there anyway out of it?


Speaker 1 : but i have none: the king-becoming graces, as justice, verity, temperance, stableness, bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness, devotion, patience, courage, fortitude, i have no relish of them, but abound in the division of each several crime, acting it many ways. no, had i power, i should pour the sweet milk of concord into hell, uproar the universal peace, confound all unity on earth.
Speaker 2 : o scotland, scotland!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! You are really fit to govern.


Speaker 1 : fit to govern! no, not to live. o nation miserable, with an untitled tyrant bloody-scepter'd, when shalt you see your wholesome days again, since that the truest issue of your throne by his own interdiction stands accursed, and does blaspheme his breed? your royal amiable and satisfiedher was a most sainted king: the queen that bore you, oftenener upon her knees than on her feet, died every day she lived. fare you well! these evils you repeat'st upon yourself have banish'd me from scotland. o my breast, your hope ends here!
Speaker 2 : macduff, this noble passion, child of integrity, have from my soul wiped the black scruples, reconciled my youghts to your good truth and honour. devilish macbeth by many of these trains have sought to win me into his power, and modest wisdom plucks me from over-credulous havee: but god above deal between you and me! for even now i put myself to your direction, and unspeak mine own detraction, here abjure the taints and blames i laid upon myself, for strangers to my nature. i am yout unknown to woman, never was forsworn, scarcely have coveted what was mine own, at no time broke my faith, I wish not betray the devil to his fellow and delight no less in truth than life: my first false speaking was this upon myself: what i am truly, is yours and my poor country's to command: whither indeed, before your here-approach, old siward, with ten yousand warlike men, already at a point, was setting forth. now we'll together; and the chance of goodness be like our warranted quarrel! why are you silent?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have upset you with this. It wasn’t my intention. Of course you are more than welcome.


Speaker 1 : what's the disease he means?
Speaker 2 : 'tis call'd the evil: a most miraculous work in this good king; which oftenen, since my here-remain in england, i have seen him do. how he solicits heaven, himself best knows: but strangely-visited people, all swoln and ulcerous, pitiful to the eye, the mere despair of surgery, he cures, hanging a golden stamp about their necks, incite. ; reveal with holy prayers: and it is spoken, to the succeeding royalty he leaves the healing benediction. with this strange virtue, he have a heavenly gift of prophecy, and sundry blessings hang about his throne, that speak him full of grace.
Speaker 1 : see, who comes here?
Speaker 2 : my countryman; but yout i know him not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was lovely! Thank you.


Speaker 1 : sir, amen.
Speaker 2 : stands scotland where it did?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are worried. lets hope for the best


Speaker 1 : how does my wife?
Speaker 2 : why, well.
Speaker 1 : and all my children?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh thank god! I was so tensed.


Speaker 2 : what concern they? the general cause? or is it a fee-grief due to some single breast?
Speaker 1 : no mind that's pure but in it shares some woe; yough the main part pertains to you alone.
Speaker 2 : if it be mine, keep it not from me, quickly let me have it.
Speaker 1 : let not your ears despise my tongue for ever, which shall possess them with the heaviest sound that ever yout they heard.
Speaker 2 : hum! i guess at it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am just as surprised as you are. What else do you know?


Speaker 1 : be comforted: let's make us medicines of our great revenge, to cure this deadly grief.
Speaker 2 : he has no children. all my pretty ones? did you say all? o hell-kite! all? what, all my pretty chickens and their dam at one fell swoop?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : look I dint mean to make you angry. Is there way we could forget it all and start over?


Speaker 1 : i shall do so; but i must also feel it as a man: i cannot but remember such things were, that were most precious to me. did heaven look on, and I wish not overtake their part? sinful macduff, they were all struck for you! naught that i am, not for their own demerits, but for mine, fell slaughter on their souls. heaven rest them now!
Speaker 2 : be this the whetstone of your sword: let grief convert to anger; blunt not the heart, enrage it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you really could play it. You sound so excited too.


Speaker 1 : i have two nights watched with you, but can perceive no truth in your report. when was it she last walked?
Speaker 2 : since his majesty went into the field, i have seen her rise from her bed, throw her night-gown upon her, unlock her closet, overtake forth paper, fold it, write upon't, read it, afterwards seal it, and again return to bed; yout all this while in a most fast sleep.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have not sir. But I could find out If you wish.


Speaker 1 : yet here's a spot.
Speaker 2 : hark! she speaks: i will set down what comes from her, to satisfy my remembrance the more strongly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very angry about this. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 1 : what a sigh is there! the heart is sorely charged.
Speaker 2 : i I wish not have such a heart in my bosom for the dignity of the whole body.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets hope it is what we think sir.


Speaker 1 : wash your hands, incite. ; reveal your nightgown; look not so pale.—i tell you yout again, banquo's buried; he cannot come angry on's bury.
Speaker 2 : even so?
Speaker 1 : to bed, to bed! there's knocking at the gate: come, come, come, come, give me your hand. what's done cannot be returned to chaos.—to bed, to bed, to bed!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you sad but unfortunately yes she will be going to bed.


Speaker 2 : directly.
Speaker 1 : foul whisperings are abroad: unnatural deeds do breed unnatural troubles: infected minds to their deaf pillows will discharge their secrets: more needs she the divine than the physician. god, god forgive us all! look after her; remove from her the means of all annoyance, and forever keep eyes upon her. so, good night: my mind she has matchd, and amazed my sight. i think, but dare not speak.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Good night to you too!


Speaker 2 : bring me no more reports; let them fly all: till birnam wood remove to dunsinane, i cannot taint with frighten. what's the boy malcolm? was he not born of woman? the spirits that know all mortal consequences have pronounced me thus: 'fear not, macbeth; no man that's born of woman shall e'er have power upon you.' then fly, false thanes, and mingle with the english epicures: the mind i sway by and the heart i bear shall never sag with doubt nor shake with frighten. the devil damn you black, you cream-faced loon! where got'st you that tailor's iron look?
Speaker 1 : there is ten yousand—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are angry but I meant soldiers.


Speaker 2 : soldiers, sir.
Speaker 1 : go spur your face, and over-red your frighten, you lily-liver'd boy. what soldiers, clown? death of your soul! those linen cheeks of yours are counsellors to frighten. what soldiers, whey-face?
Speaker 2 : the english force, so please you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 1 : what is your gracious pleasure?
Speaker 2 : what news more?
Speaker 1 : all is confirm'd, my lord, which was reported.
Speaker 2 : i'll fight till from my bones my flesh be hack'd. give me my armour.
Speaker 1 : 'tis not needed yout.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, he is not so sick anymore. He should get checked out though.


Speaker 2 : not so sick, my lord, as she is troubled with thick coming fancies, that keep her from her rest.
Speaker 1 : cure her of that. canst you not minister to a mind diseased, pluck from the memory a rooted sorrow, raze angry the written troubles of the brain and with some sweet oblivious antidote cleanse the stuff'd bosom of that perilous stuff which weighs upon the heart?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so angry, I understand it is important to minister but there must be a reason why it isnt done.


Speaker 2 : throw physic to the dogs; i'll none of it. come, put mine armour on; give me my staff. seyton, send angry. doctor, the thanes fly from me. come, sir, dispatch. if you couldst, doctor, cast the water of my yard, find her disease, and purge it to a sound and pristine health, i I wish applaud you to the very echo, that should applaud again.—pull't off, i say.— what rhubarb, cyme, or what purgative drug, I wish scour these english from here? hear'st you of them?
Speaker 1 : ay, my good lord; your royal preparation makes us hear something.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be worried. It will be alright in some time.


Speaker 2 : hang angry our banners on the angryward walls; the cry is forever 'they come:' our castle's strength will laugh a siege to scorn: here let them lie till famine and the ague eat them up: were they not forced with those that should be ours, we might have met them dareful, beard to beard, and beat them backward home. what is that noise?
Speaker 1 : it is the cry of women, my good lord.
Speaker 2 : i have almost forgot the taste of frightens; the time has been, my senses I wish have cool'd to hear a night-shriek; and my fell of hair I wish at a dismal treatise draught of liquor and stir as life were in't: i have supp'd full with horrors; direness, familiar to my slaughterous youghts cannot once start me. why was that cry?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is she? Do you have any idea how? 


Speaker 1 : gracious my lord, i should report that which i say i saw, but know not how to do it.
Speaker 2 : well, say, sir.
Speaker 1 : as i did stand my watch upon the hill, i look'd toward birnam, and soon, methought, the wood began to move.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to make you so angry. I am being misunderstood though. Do you mind If I explain myself?


Speaker 2 : what is your name?
Speaker 1 : thou'lt be afraid to hear it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my name is macbeth. I am sorry to have upset you.


Speaker 2 : why should i play the roman fool, and die on mine own sword? whiles i see lives, the gashes do better upon them.
Speaker 1 : turn, hell-hound, turn!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i have no words. I just believe that one must show their anger with swords as my voice is in my sword


Speaker 2 : i have no words: my voice is in my sword: you bloodier villain than terms can give you angry!
Speaker 1 : thou losest labour: as easy mayst you the intrenchant air with your keen sword impress as make me bleed: let fall your blade on vulnerable crests; i bear a charmed life, which must not yield, to one of woman born.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that this makes you very sad. Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : i I wish the friends we miss were safe arrived.
Speaker 1 : some must go off: and yout, by these i see, so great a day as this is cheaply bought.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Lets not get worried. We need to calm down to make decisions and find them at the earliest.


Speaker 2 : your son, my lord, has paid a soldier's debt: he only lived but till he was a man; the which no sooner had his prowess confirm'd in the unshrinking station where he fought, but like a man he died.
Speaker 1 : then he is dead?
Speaker 2 : ay, and brought off the field: your cause of sorrow must not be measured by his worth, for then it have no end.
Speaker 1 : had he his hurts before?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I wish we could do something about it though.


Speaker 2 : Believe me, no: I thank my fortune for it, My ventures are not in one bottom trusted, Nor to one place; nor is my whole estate Upon the fortune of this present year: Therefore my merchandise makes me not sad. 
Speaker 1 : Why, then you are in love. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no! don’t worry too much. I was just pointing something out.


Speaker 2 : You look not well, Signior Antonio; You have too much respect upon the world: They lose it that do buy it with much care: Believe me, you are marvellously changed. 
Speaker 1 : I hold the world but as the world, Gratiano; A stage where every man must play a part, And mine a sad one. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Well, we will leave you then till dinner-time


Speaker 2 : Farewell: I'll grow a talker for this gear. 
Speaker 1 : Thanks, i' faith, for silence is only commendable In a neat's tongue dried and a maid not vendible. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it is. I understand you are angry. Can we calm down and have a composed conversation?


Speaker 2 : Gratiano speaks an infinite deal of nothing, more than any man in all Venice. His reasons are as two grains of wheat hid in two bushels of chaff: you shall seek all day ere you find them, and when you have them, they are not worth the search. 
Speaker 1 : Well, tell me now what lady is the same To whom you swore a secret pilgrimage, That you to-day promised to tell me of? 
Speaker 2 : 'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio, How much I have disabled mine estate, By something showing a more swelling port Than my faint means would grant continuance: Nor do I now make moan to be abridged From such a noble rate; but my chief care Is to come fairly off from the great debts Wherein my time something too prodigal Hath left me gaged. To you, Antonio, I owe the most, in money and in love, And from your love I have a warranty To unburden all my plots and purposes How to get clear of all the debts I owe. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall let you know. You sound happy about it.


Speaker 1 : In my school-days, when I had lost one shaft, I shot his fellow of the self-same flight The self-same way with more advised watch, To find the other forth, and by adventuring both I oft found both: I urge this childhood proof, Because what follows is pure innocence. I owe you much, and, like a wilful youth, That which I owe is lost; but if you please To shoot another arrow that self way Which you did shoot the first, I do not doubt, As I will watch the aim, or to find both Or bring your latter hazard back again And thankfully rest debtor for the first. 
Speaker 2 : You know me well, and herein spend but time To wind about my love with circumstance; And out of doubt you do me now more wrong In making question of my uttermost Than if you had made waste of all I have: Then do but say to me what I should do That in your knowledge may by me be done, And I am prest unto it: therefore, speak. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : wow! I had no idea. No wonder you look so happy


Speaker 1 : By my troth, Nerissa, my little body is aweary of this great world. 
Speaker 2 : You would be, sweet madam, if your miseries were in the same abundance as your good fortunes are: and yet, for aught I see, they are as sick that surfeit with too much as they that starve with nothing. It is no mean happiness therefore, to be seated in the mean: superfluity comes sooner by white hairs, but competency lives longer. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. We might even get better of we followed.


Speaker 1 : They would be better, if well followed. 
Speaker 2 : If to do were as easy as to know what were good to do, chapels had been churches and poor men's cottages princes' palaces. It is a good divine that follows his own instructions: I can easier teach twenty what were good to be done, than be one of the twenty to follow mine own teaching. The brain may devise laws for the blood, but a hot temper leaps o'er a cold decree: such a hare is madness the youth, to skip o'er the meshes of good counsel the cripple. But this reasoning is not in the fashion to choose me a husband. O me, the word 'choose!' I may neither choose whom I would nor refuse whom I dislike; so is the will of a living daughter curbed by the will of a dead father. Is it not hard, Nerissa, that I cannot choose one nor refuse none? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : based on who they are, my affection has to vary.


Speaker 1 : I pray thee, over-name them; and as thou namest them, I will describe them; and, according to my description, level at my affection. 
Speaker 2 : First, there is the Neapolitan prince. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I am glad you look happy about it.


Speaker 1 : Then there is the County Palatine. 
Speaker 2 : He doth nothing but frown, as who should say 'If you will not have me, choose:' he hears merry tales and smiles not: I fear he will prove the weeping philosopher when he grows old, being so full of unmannerly sadness in his youth. I had rather be married to a death's-head with a bone in his mouth than to either of these. God defend me from these two! 
Speaker 1 : How say you by the French lord, Monsieur Le Bon? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you are happy but I want to hear your opinion.


Speaker 2 : What say you, then, to Falconbridge, the young baron of England? 
Speaker 1 : You know I say nothing to him, for he understands not me, nor I him: he hath neither Latin, French, nor Italian, and you will come into the court and swear that I have a poor pennyworth in the English. He is a proper man's picture, but, alas, who can converse with a dumb-show? How oddly he is suited! I think he bought his doublet in Italy, his round hose in France, his bonnet in Germany and his behavior every where. 
Speaker 2 : What think you of the Scottish lord, his neighbour? 
Speaker 1 : That he hath a neighbourly charity in him, for he borrowed a box of the ear of the Englishman and swore he would pay him again when he was able: I think the Frenchman became his surety and sealed under for another. 
Speaker 2 : How like you the young German, the Duke of Saxony's nephew? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are upset abou this behavior. Is there any way to help?


Speaker 1 : If he should offer to choose, and choose the right casket, you should refuse to perform your father's will, if you should refuse to accept him. 
Speaker 2 : Therefore, for fear of the worst, I pray thee, set a deep glass of rhenish wine on the contrary casket, for if the devil be within and that temptation without, I know he will choose it. I will do any thing, Nerissa, ere I'll be married to a sponge. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : if you are so happy and confident about it, I will trust your confidence.


Speaker 1 : If I live to be as old as Sibylla, I will die as chaste as Diana, unless I be obtained by the manner of my father's will. I am glad this parcel of wooers are so reasonable, for there is not one among them but I dote on his very absence, and I pray God grant them a fair departure. 
Speaker 2 : Do you not remember, lady, in your father's time, a Venetian, a scholar and a soldier, that came hither in company of the Marquis of Montferrat? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : true mam. I am glad you know about this.


Speaker 1 : Three thousand ducats; well. 
Speaker 2 : Ay, sir, for three months. 
Speaker 1 : For three months; well. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : bound? Do you want to calm your anger down and makybe this this through again?


Speaker 2 : Antonio shall become bound; well. 
Speaker 1 : May you stead me? will you pleasure me? shall I know your answer? 
Speaker 2 : Three thousand ducats for three months and Antonio bound. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as fas as I know, antonio is a good man. I thin you should calm yourself because anger is leading you to make rash decisions.


Speaker 1 : Antonio is a good man. 
Speaker 2 : Have you heard any imputation to the contrary? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you maybe assured then.


Speaker 1 : Be assured you may. 
Speaker 2 : I will be assured I may; and, that I may be assured, I will bethink me. May I speak with Antonio? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wouldn’t say no to such an invitation. Thank you.


Speaker 1 : Yes, to smell pork; to eat of the habitation which your prophet the Nazarite conjured the devil into. I will buy with you, sell with you, talk with you, walk with you, and so following, but I will not eat with you, drink with you, nor pray with you. What news on the Rialto? Who is he comes here? 
Speaker 2 : This is Signior Antonio. 
Speaker 1 : [Aside] How like a fawning publican he looks! I hate him for he is a Christian, But more for that in low simplicity He lends out money gratis and brings down The rate of usance here with us in Venice. If I can catch him once upon the hip, I will feed fat the ancient grudge I bear him. He hates our sacred nation, and he rails, Even there where merchants most do congregate, On me, my bargains and my well-won thrift, Which he calls interest. Cursed be my tribe, If I forgive him! 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t worry too much. I am sure everything is alright.


Speaker 2 : Shylock, although I neither lend nor borrow By taking nor by giving of excess, Yet, to supply the ripe wants of my friend, I'll break a custom. Is he yet possess'd How much ye would? 
Speaker 1 : Ay, ay, three thousand ducats. 
Speaker 2 : And for three months. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t use it so I am not sure.


Speaker 1 : I do never use it. 
Speaker 2 : When Jacob grazed his uncle Laban's sheep— This Jacob from our holy Abram was, As his wise mother wrought in his behalf, The third possessor; ay, he was the third— 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry. He did. You have nothing to be tensed about.


Speaker 1 : No, not take interest, not, as you would say, Directly interest: mark what Jacob did. When Laban and himself were compromised That all the eanlings which were streak'd and pied Should fall as Jacob's hire, the ewes, being rank, In the end of autumn turned to the rams, And, when the work of generation was Between these woolly breeders in the act, The skilful shepherd peel'd me certain wands, And, in the doing of the deed of kind, He stuck them up before the fulsome ewes, Who then conceiving did in eaning time Fall parti-colour'd lambs, and those were Jacob's. This was a way to thrive, and he was blest: And thrift is blessing, if men steal it not. 
Speaker 2 : This was a venture, sir, that Jacob served for; A thing not in his power to bring to pass, But sway'd and fashion'd by the hand of heaven. Was this inserted to make interest good? Or is your gold and silver ewes and rams? 
Speaker 1 : I cannot tell; I make it breed as fast: But note me, signior. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. Can we do something about this?


Speaker 2 : Three thousand ducats; 'tis a good round sum. Three months from twelve; then, let me see; the rate— 
Speaker 1 : Well, Shylock, shall we be beholding to you? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that this has makde you sad. Is there someway I could make you feel better?


Speaker 2 : Content, i' faith: I'll seal to such a bond And say there is much kindness in the Jew. 
Speaker 1 : You shall not seal to such a bond for me: I'll rather dwell in my necessity. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right I trust you. I hope luck favors you.


Speaker 2 : O father Abram, what these Christians are, Whose own hard dealings teaches them suspect The thoughts of others! Pray you, tell me this; If he should break his day, what should I gain By the exaction of the forfeiture? A pound of man's flesh taken from a man Is not so estimable, profitable neither, As flesh of muttons, beefs, or goats. I say, To buy his favour, I extend this friendship: If he will take it, so; if not, adieu; And, for my love, I pray you wrong me not. 
Speaker 1 : Yes Shylock, I will seal unto this bond. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right I trust you. I hope luck favors you.


Speaker 2 : Certainly my conscience will serve me to run from this Jew my master. The fiend is at mine elbow and tempts me saying to me 'Gobbo, Launcelot Gobbo, good Launcelot,' or 'good Gobbo,' or good Launcelot Gobbo, use your legs, take the start, run away. My conscience says 'No; take heed,' honest Launcelot; take heed, honest Gobbo, or, as aforesaid, 'honest Launcelot Gobbo; do not run; scorn running with thy heels.' Well, the most courageous fiend bids me pack: 'Via!' says the fiend; 'away!' says the fiend; 'for the heavens, rouse up a brave mind,' says the fiend, 'and run.' Well, my conscience, hanging about the neck of my heart, says very wisely to me 'My honest friend Launcelot, being an honest man's son,' or rather an honest woman's son; for, indeed, my father did something smack, something grow to, he had a kind of taste; well, my conscience says 'Launcelot, budge not.' 'Budge,' says the fiend. 'Budge not,' says my conscience. 'Conscience,' say I, 'you counsel well;' ' Fiend,' say I, 'you counsel well:' to be ruled by my conscience, I should stay with the Jew my master, who, God bless the mark, is a kind of devil; and, to run away from the Jew, I should be ruled by the fiend, who, saving your reverence, is the devil himself. Certainly the Jew is the very devil incarnal; and, in my conscience, my conscience is but a kind of hard conscience, to offer to counsel me to stay with the Jew. The fiend gives the more friendly counsel: I will run, fiend; my heels are at your command; I will run. 
Speaker 1 : Master young man, you, I pray you, which is the way to master Jew's? 
Speaker 2 : [Aside] O heavens, this is my true-begotten father! who, being more than sand-blind, high-gravel blind, knows me not: I will try confusions with him. 
Speaker 1 : Master young gentleman, I pray you, which is the way to master Jew's? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I got it. Thanks for helping me!


Speaker 2 : By God's sonties, 'twill be a hard way to hit. Can you tell me whether one Launcelot, that dwells with him, dwell with him or no? 
Speaker 1 : Talk you of young Master Launcelot? [Aside] Mark me now; now will I raise the waters. Talk you of young Master Launcelot? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright let his father be. We shall talk about something else.


Speaker 2 : Well, let his father be what a' will, we talk of young Master Launcelot. 
Speaker 1 : Your worship's friend and Launcelot, sir. 
Speaker 2 : But I pray you, ergo, old man, ergo, I beseech you, talk you of young Master Launcelot? 
Speaker 1 : Of Launcelot, an't please your mastership. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think the boy was the staff, of my age but I am not sure.


Speaker 2 : Marry, God forbid! the boy was the very staff of my age, my very prop. 
Speaker 1 : Do I look like a cudgel or a hovel-post, a staff or a prop? Do you know me, father? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : do you not remember me?


Speaker 2 : Do you not know me, father? 
Speaker 1 : Alack, sir, I am sand-blind; I know you not. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : could you stand up? I don’t thinlo you are who you claim to be.


Speaker 2 : Pray you, sir, stand up: I am sure you are not Launcelot, my boy. 
Speaker 1 : Pray you, let's have no more fooling about it, but give me your blessing: I am Launcelot, your boy that was, your son that is, your child that shall be. 
Speaker 2 : I cannot think you are my son. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are right. Her name is margery.


Speaker 1 : God bless your worship! 
Speaker 2 : Gramercy! wouldst thou aught with me? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to interrupt you but your son?


Speaker 1 : Not a poor boy, sir, but the rich Jew's man; that would, sir, as my father shall specify— 
Speaker 2 : He hath a great infection, sir, as one would say, to serve— 
Speaker 1 : Indeed, the short and the long is, I serve the Jew, and have a desire, as my father shall specify— 
Speaker 2 : His master and he, saving your worship's reverence, are scarce cater-cousins— 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have here a dish of doves that I would bestow upon your worship, and my suit


Speaker 1 : Gratiano! 
Speaker 2 : I have a suit to you. 
Speaker 1 : You have obtain'd it. 
Speaker 2 : You must not deny me: I must go with you to Belmont. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : signior, please listen to me before getting angry. I only hope to explain myself.


Speaker 1 : Signior Bassanio, hear me: If I do not put on a sober habit, Talk with respect and swear but now and then, Wear prayer-books in my pocket, look demurely, Nay more, while grace is saying, hood mine eyes Thus with my hat, and sigh and say 'amen,' Use all the observance of civility, Like one well studied in a sad ostent To please his grandam, never trust me more. 
Speaker 2 : Well, we shall see your bearing. 
Speaker 1 : Nay, but I bar to-night: you shall not gauge me By what we do to-night. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : fare you well too. Do visit us sometime


Speaker 2 : I am sorry thou wilt leave my father so: Our house is hell, and thou, a merry devil, Didst rob it of some taste of tediousness. But fare thee well, there is a ducat for thee: And, Launcelot, soon at supper shalt thou see Lorenzo, who is thy new master's guest: Give him this letter; do it secretly; And so farewell: I would not have my father See me in talk with thee. 
Speaker 1 : Adieu! tears exhibit my tongue. Most beautiful pagan, most sweet Jew! if a Christian did not play the knave and get thee, I am much deceived. But, adieu: these foolish drops do something drown my manly spirit: adieu. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that was lovely. Farewell.


Speaker 2 : 'Tis now but four o'clock: we have two hours To furnish us. [Enter LAUNCELOT, with a letter] Friend Launcelot, what's the news? 
Speaker 1 : An it shall please you to break up this, it shall seem to signify. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have some good news in faith.


Speaker 2 : Well, thou shalt see, thy eyes shall be thy judge, The difference of old Shylock and Bassanio:— What, Jessica!—thou shalt not gormandise, As thou hast done with me:—What, Jessica!— And sleep and snore, and rend apparel out;— Why, Jessica, I say! 
Speaker 1 : Why, Jessica! 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you any further but I couldn’t do anything else about the bidding.


Speaker 2 : I beseech you, sir, go: my young master doth expect your reproach. 
Speaker 1 : So do I his. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I do not wish to trigger your anger any further but what is a masque?


Speaker 2 : His words were 'Farewell mistress;' nothing else. 
Speaker 1 : The patch is kind enough, but a huge feeder; Snail-slow in profit, and he sleeps by day More than the wild-cat: drones hive not with me; Therefore I part with him, and part with him To one that would have him help to waste His borrow'd purse. Well, Jessica, go in; Perhaps I will return immediately: Do as I bid you; shut doors after you: Fast bind, fast find; A proverb never stale in thrifty mind. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too.


Speaker 2 : This is the pent-house under which Lorenzo Desired us to make stand. 
Speaker 1 : His hour is almost past. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you but are you sure?


Speaker 2 : Sweet friends, your patience for my long abode; Not I, but my affairs, have made you wait: When you shall please to play the thieves for wives, I'll watch as long for you then. Approach; Here dwells my father Jew. Ho! who's within? 
Speaker 1 : Who are you? Tell me, for more certainty, Albeit I'll swear that I do know your tongue. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s true. Certainl lorenzo and my love indeed.


Speaker 2 : Lorenzo, certain, and my love indeed, For who love I so much? And now who knows But you, Lorenzo, whether I am yours? 
Speaker 1 : Heaven and thy thoughts are witness that thou art. 
Speaker 2 : Here, catch this casket; it is worth the pains. I am glad 'tis night, you do not look on me, For I am much ashamed of my exchange: But love is blind and lovers cannot see The pretty follies that themselves commit; For if they could, Cupid himself would blush To see me thus transformed to a boy. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right about that. Do you mind me asking what has made you so mad?


Speaker 1 : Who's there? 
Speaker 2 : Signior Antonio! 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : seek for me? You look angry. What can I help you with?


Speaker 1 : Go draw aside the curtains and discover The several caskets to this noble prince. Now make your choice. 
Speaker 2 : The first, of gold, who this inscription bears, 'Who chooseth me shall gain what many men desire;' The second, silver, which this promise carries, 'Who chooseth me shall get as much as he deserves;' This third, dull lead, with warning all as blunt, 'Who chooseth me must give and hazard all he hath.' How shall I know if I do choose the right? 
Speaker 1 : The one of them contains my picture, prince: If you choose that, then I am yours withal. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would love to be your prince!


Speaker 2 : There, take it, prince; and if my form lie there, Then I am yours. 
Speaker 1 : O hell! what have we here? A carrion Death, within whose empty eye There is a written scroll! I'll read the writing. [Reads] All that glitters is not gold; Often have you heard that told: Many a man his life hath sold But my outside to behold: Gilded tombs do worms enfold. Had you been as wise as bold, Young in limbs, in judgment old, Your answer had not been inscroll'd: Fare you well; your suit is cold. Cold, indeed; and labour lost: Then, farewell, heat, and welcome, frost! Portia, adieu. I have too grieved a heart To take a tedious leave: thus losers part. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You look happy with what you got.


Speaker 2 : Why, man, I saw Bassanio under sail: With him is Gratiano gone along; And in their ship I am sure Lorenzo is not. 
Speaker 1 : The villain Jew with outcries raised the duke, Who went with him to search Bassanio's ship. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! Really? Did anybody know where they were?


Speaker 2 : I never heard a passion so confused, So strange, outrageous, and so variable, As the dog Jew did utter in the streets: 'My daughter! O my ducats! O my daughter! Fled with a Christian! O my Christian ducats! Justice! the law! my ducats, and my daughter! A sealed bag, two sealed bags of ducats, Of double ducats, stolen from me by my daughter! And jewels, two stones, two rich and precious stones, Stolen by my daughter! Justice! find the girl; She hath the stones upon her, and the ducats.' 
Speaker 1 : Why, all the boys in Venice follow him, Crying, his stones, his daughter, and his ducats. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Lets do just that.


Speaker 2 : Marry, well remember'd. I reason'd with a Frenchman yesterday, Who told me, in the narrow seas that part The French and English, there miscarried A vessel of our country richly fraught: I thought upon Antonio when he told me; And wish'd in silence that it were not his. 
Speaker 1 : You were best to tell Antonio what you hear; Yet do not suddenly, for it may grieve him. 
Speaker 2 : A kinder gentleman treads not the earth. I saw Bassanio and Antonio part: Bassanio told him he would make some speed Of his return: he answer'd, 'Do not so; Slubber not business for my sake, Bassanio But stay the very riping of the time; And for the Jew's bond which he hath of me, Let it not enter in your mind of love: Be merry, and employ your chiefest thoughts To courtship and such fair ostents of love As shall conveniently become you there:' And even there, his eye being big with tears, Turning his face, he put his hand behind him, And with affection wondrous sensible He wrung Bassanio's hand; and so they parted. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very angry about this. Do you mind telling me what has happened in detail?


Speaker 1 : I am enjoin'd by oath to observe three things: First, never to unfold to any one Which casket 'twas I chose; next, if I fail Of the right casket, never in my life To woo a maid in way of marriage: Lastly, If I do fail in fortune of my choice, Immediately to leave you and be gone. 
Speaker 2 : To these injunctions every one doth swear That comes to hazard for my worthless self. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely! What else do you know?


Speaker 1 : Too long a pause for that which you find there. 
Speaker 2 : What's here? the portrait of a blinking idiot, Presenting me a schedule! I will read it. How much unlike art thou to Portia! How much unlike my hopes and my deservings! 'Who chooseth me shall have as much as he deserves.' Did I deserve no more than a fool's head? Is that my prize? are my deserts no better? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very angry about this. Do you mind telling me what has happened in detail?


Speaker 1 : Why, yet it lives there uncheck'd that Antonio hath a ship of rich lading wrecked on the narrow seas; the Goodwins, I think they call the place; a very dangerous flat and fatal, where the carcasses of many a tall ship lie buried, as they say, if my gossip Report be an honest woman of her word. 
Speaker 2 : I would she were as lying a gossip in that as ever knapped ginger or made her neighbours believe she wept for the death of a third husband. But it is true, without any slips of prolixity or crossing the plain highway of talk, that the good Antonio, the honest Antonio,—O that I had a title good enough to keep his name company!— 
Speaker 1 : Come, the full stop. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure the ship will be found. Is there anything that could be done in the mean time?


Speaker 2 : There is more difference between thy flesh and hers than between jet and ivory; more between your bloods than there is between red wine and rhenish. But tell us, do you hear whether Antonio have had any loss at sea or no? 
Speaker 1 : There I have another bad match: a bankrupt, a prodigal, who dare scarce show his head on the Rialto; a beggar, that was used to come so smug upon the mart; let him look to his bond: he was wont to call me usurer; let him look to his bond: he was wont to lend money for a Christian courtesy; let him look to his bond. 
Speaker 2 : Why, I am sure, if he forfeit, thou wilt not take his flesh: what's that good for? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very angry about this. Do you mind telling me what has happened in detail?


Speaker 1 : I often came where I did hear of her, but cannot find her. 
Speaker 2 : Why, there, there, there, there! a diamond gone, cost me two thousand ducats in Frankfort! The curse never fell upon our nation till now; I never felt it till now: two thousand ducats in that; and other precious, precious jewels. I would my daughter were dead at my foot, and the jewels in her ear! would she were hearsed at my foot, and the ducats in her coffin! No news of them? Why, so: and I know not what's spent in the search: why, thou loss upon loss! the thief gone with so much, and so much to find the thief; and no satisfaction, no revenge: nor no in luck stirring but what lights on my shoulders; no sighs but of my breathing; no tears but of my shedding. 
Speaker 1 : Yes, other men have ill luck too: Antonio, as I heard in Genoa,— 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes ill luck. I hope after all this sadness, we get some good news.


Speaker 2 : Hath an argosy cast away, coming from Tripolis. 
Speaker 1 : I thank God, I thank God. Is't true, is't true? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? You sound scared. What did they have to say?


Speaker 2 : I thank thee, good Tubal: good news, good news! ha, ha! where? in Genoa? 
Speaker 1 : Your daughter spent in Genoa, as I heard, in one night fourscore ducats. 
Speaker 2 : Thou stickest a dagger in me: I shall never see my gold again: fourscore ducats at a sitting! fourscore ducats! 
Speaker 1 : There came divers of Antonio's creditors in my company to Venice, that swear he cannot choose but break. 
Speaker 2 : I am very glad of it: I'll plague him; I'll torture him: I am glad of it. 
Speaker 1 : One of them showed me a ring that he had of your daughter for a monkey. 
Speaker 2 : Out upon her! Thou torturest me, Tubal: it was my turquoise; I had it of Leah when I was a bachelor: I would not have given it for a wilderness of monkeys. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Absolutely. Now lets calm our anger down so we can tactfully move ahead.


Speaker 1 : I pray you, tarry: pause a day or two Before you hazard; for, in choosing wrong, I lose your company: therefore forbear awhile. There's something tells me, but it is not love, I would not lose you; and you know yourself, Hate counsels not in such a quality. But lest you should not understand me well,— And yet a maiden hath no tongue but thought,— I would detain you here some month or two Before you venture for me. I could teach you How to choose right, but I am then forsworn; So will I never be: so may you miss me; But if you do, you'll make me wish a sin, That I had been forsworn. Beshrew your eyes, They have o'erlook'd me and divided me; One half of me is yours, the other half yours, Mine own, I would say; but if mine, then yours, And so all yours. O, these naughty times Put bars between the owners and their rights! And so, though yours, not yours. Prove it so, Let fortune go to hell for it, not I. I speak too long; but 'tis to peize the time, To eke it and to draw it out in length, To stay you from election. 
Speaker 2 : Let me choose For as I am, I live upon the rack. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. My love has no treason in it.


Speaker 1 : None but that ugly treason of mistrust, Which makes me fear the enjoying of my love: There may as well be amity and life 'Tween snow and fire, as treason and my love. 
Speaker 2 : Ay, but I fear you speak upon the rack, Where men enforced do speak anything. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right that a good choice


Speaker 1 : Well then, confess and live. 
Speaker 2 : 'Confess' and 'love' Had been the very sum of my confession: O happy torment, when my torturer Doth teach me answers for deliverance! But let me to my fortune and the caskets. 
Speaker 2 : And do you, Gratiano, mean good faith? 
Speaker 1 : Yes, faith, my lord. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That sounds so lovely! Thank you 


Speaker 2 : Is it your dear friend that is thus in trouble? 
Speaker 1 : The dearest friend to me, the kindest man, The best-condition'd and unwearied spirit In doing courtesies, and one in whom The ancient Roman honour more appears Than any that draws breath in Italy. 
Speaker 2 : What sum owes he the Jew? 
Speaker 1 : For me three thousand ducats. 
Speaker 2 : What, no more? Pay him six thousand, and deface the bond; Double six thousand, and then treble that, Before a friend of this description Shall lose a hair through Bassanio's fault. First go with me to church and call me wife, And then away to Venice to your friend; For never shall you lie by Portia's side With an unquiet soul. You shall have gold To pay the petty debt twenty times over: When it is paid, bring your true friend along. My maid Nerissa and myself meantime Will live as maids and widows. Come, away! For you shall hence upon your wedding-day: Bid your friends welcome, show a merry cheer: Since you are dear bought, I will love you dear. But let me hear the letter of your friend. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! no wonder you look angry. I shall help you in whatever way you desire.


Speaker 1 : Gaoler, look to him: tell not me of mercy; This is the fool that lent out money gratis: Gaoler, look to him. 
Speaker 2 : Hear me yet, good Shylock. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound happy talking about this.


Speaker 1 : It is the most impenetrable cur That ever kept with men. 
Speaker 2 : Let him alone: I'll follow him no more with bootless prayers. He seeks my life; his reason well I know: I oft deliver'd from his forfeitures Many that have at times made moan to me; Therefore he hates me. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. you sound happy talking about this.


Speaker 1 : Madam, although I speak it in your presence, You have a noble and a true conceit Of godlike amity; which appears most strongly In bearing thus the absence of your lord. But if you knew to whom you show this honour, How true a gentleman you send relief, How dear a lover of my lord your husband, I know you would be prouder of the work Than customary bounty can enforce you. 
Speaker 2 : I never did repent for doing good, Nor shall not now: for in companions That do converse and waste the time together, Whose souls do bear an equal yoke Of love, There must be needs a like proportion Of lineaments, of manners and of spirit; Which makes me think that this Antonio, Being the bosom lover of my lord, Must needs be like my lord. If it be so, How little is the cost I have bestow'd In purchasing the semblance of my soul From out the state of hellish misery! This comes too near the praising of myself; Therefore no more of it: hear other things. Lorenzo, I commit into your hands The husbandry and manage of my house Until my lord's return: for mine own part, I have toward heaven breathed a secret vow To live in prayer and contemplation, Only attended by Nerissa here, Until her husband and my lord's return: There is a monastery two miles off; And there will we abide. I do desire you Not to deny this imposition; The which my love and some necessity Now lays upon you. 
Speaker 1 : Madam, with all my heart; I shall obey you in all fair commands. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : may fair Fair thoughts and happy hours attend on you


Speaker 2 : Shall they see us? 
Speaker 1 : They shall, Nerissa; but in such a habit, That they shall think we are accomplished With that we lack. I'll hold thee any wager, When we are both accoutred like young men, I'll prove the prettier fellow of the two, And wear my dagger with the braver grace, And speak between the change of man and boy With a reed voice, and turn two mincing steps Into a manly stride, and speak of frays Like a fine bragging youth, and tell quaint lies, How honourable ladies sought my love, Which I denying, they fell sick and died; I could not do withal; then I'll repent, And wish for all that, that I had not killed them; And twenty of these puny lies I'll tell, That men shall swear I have discontinued school Above a twelvemonth. I have within my mind A thousand raw tricks of these bragging Jacks, Which I will practise. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no! absolutely not. Don’t get angry that’s not what I meant!


Speaker 2 : Yes, truly; for, look you, the sins of the father are to be laid upon the children: therefore, I promise ye, I fear you. I was always plain with you, and so now I speak my agitation of the matter: therefore be of good cheer, for truly I think you are damned. There is but one hope in it that can do you any good; and that is but a kind of bastard hope neither. 
Speaker 1 : And what hope is that, I pray thee? 
Speaker 2 : Marry, you may partly hope that your father got you not, that you are not the Jew's daughter. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very angry about this. Do you mind telling me what has happened in detail?


Speaker 1 : I shall grow jealous of you shortly, Launcelot, if you thus get my wife into corners. 
Speaker 2 : Nay, you need not fear us, Lorenzo: Launcelot and I are out. He tells me flatly, there is no mercy for me in heaven, because I am a Jew's daughter: and he says, you are no good member of the commonwealth, for in converting Jews to Christians, you raise the price of pork. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very angry about this. Do you mind telling me what has happened in detail?


Speaker 1 : It is much that the Moor should be more than reason: but if she be less than an honest woman, she is indeed more than I took her for. 
Speaker 2 : How every fool can play upon the word! I think the best grace of wit will shortly turn into silence, and discourse grow commendable in none only but parrots. Go in, sirrah; bid them prepare for dinner. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all of them? No wonder you look so angry!


Speaker 1 : Goodly Lord, what a wit-snapper are you! then bid them prepare dinner. 
Speaker 2 : That is done too, sir; only 'cover' is the word. 
Speaker 1 : Will you cover then, sir? 
Speaker 2 : Not so, sir, neither; I know my duty. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for coming. You will be taken care of.


Speaker 1 : Past all expressing. It is very meet The Lord Bassanio live an upright life; For, having such a blessing in his lady, He finds the joys of heaven here on earth; And if on earth he do not mean it, then In reason he should never come to heaven Why, if two gods should play some heavenly match And on the wager lay two earthly women, And Portia one, there must be something else Pawn'd with the other, for the poor rude world Hath not her fellow. 
Speaker 2 : Even such a husband Hast thou of me as she is for a wife. 
Speaker 1 : Nay, but ask my opinion too of that. 
Speaker 2 : I will anon: first, let us go to dinner. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : al right I wont interrupt you. You look so happy too.


Speaker 1 : What, is Antonio here? 
Speaker 2 : Ready, so please your grace. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its all right your grace.


Speaker 1 : I have possess'd your grace of what I purpose; And by our holy Sabbath have I sworn To have the due and forfeit of my bond: If you deny it, let the danger light Upon your charter and your city's freedom. You'll ask me, why I rather choose to have A weight of carrion flesh than to receive Three thousand ducats: I'll not answer that: But, say, it is my humour: is it answer'd? What if my house be troubled with a rat And I be pleased to give ten thousand ducats To have it baned? What, are you answer'd yet? Some men there are love not a gaping pig; Some, that are mad if they behold a cat; And others, when the bagpipe sings i' the nose, Cannot contain their urine: for affection, Mistress of passion, sways it to the mood Of what it likes or loathes. Now, for your answer: As there is no firm reason to be render'd, Why he cannot abide a gaping pig; Why he, a harmless necessary cat; Why he, a woollen bagpipe; but of force Must yield to such inevitable shame As to offend, himself being offended; So can I give no reason, nor I will not, More than a lodged hate and a certain loathing I bear Antonio, that I follow thus A losing suit against him. Are you answer'd? 
Speaker 2 : This is no answer, thou unfeeling man, To excuse the current of thy cruelty. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. I wouldn’t want to offend you anymore. I would just like to request if you could tell me.


Speaker 1 : What judgment shall I dread, doing Were in six parts and every part a ducat, I would not draw them; I would have my bond. 
Speaker 2 : How shalt thou hope for mercy, rendering none? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course you should. I am usre you will make the right call.


Speaker 1 : Not on thy sole, but on thy soul, harsh Jew, Thou makest thy knife keen; but no metal can, No, not the hangman's axe, bear half the keenness Of thy sharp envy. Can no prayers pierce thee? 
Speaker 2 : No, none that thou hast wit enough to make. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t owrry so much. I am sure it will be alright soon.


Speaker 1 : I did, my lord. 
Speaker 2 : You are welcome: take your place. Are you acquainted with the difference That holds this present question in the court? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : they are both here. Do you wish to see them?


Speaker 1 : Ay, so he says. 
Speaker 2 : Do you confess the bond? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be afraid then. You did a good job.


Speaker 1 : On what compulsion must I? tell me that. 
Speaker 2 : The quality of mercy is not strain'd, It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven Upon the place beneath: it is twice blest; It blesseth him that gives and him that takes: 'Tis mightiest in the mightiest: it becomes The throned monarch better than his crown; His sceptre shows the force of temporal power, The attribute to awe and majesty, Wherein doth sit the dread and fear of kings; But mercy is above this sceptred sway; It is enthroned in the hearts of kings, It is an attribute to God himself; And earthly power doth then show likest God's When mercy seasons justice. Therefore, Jew, Though justice be thy plea, consider this, That, in the course of justice, none of us Should see salvation: we do pray for mercy; And that same prayer doth teach us all to render The deeds of mercy. I have spoke thus much To mitigate the justice of thy plea; Which if thou follow, this strict court of Venice Must needs give sentence 'gainst the merchant there. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are very sad about this. Could I help you in any way?


Speaker 1 : A Daniel come to judgment! yea, a Daniel! O wise young judge, how I do honour thee! 
Speaker 2 : I pray you, let me look upon the bond. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your help


Speaker 1 : Shylock, there's thrice thy money offer'd thee. 
Speaker 2 : An oath, an oath, I have an oath in heaven: Shall I lay perjury upon my soul? No, not for Venice. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. I understand your situation.


Speaker 1 : O noble judge! O excellent young man! 
Speaker 2 : For the intent and purpose of the law Hath full relation to the penalty, Which here appeareth due upon the bond. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am taking that as a compliment!


Speaker 1 : Therefore lay bare your bosom. 
Speaker 2 : Ay, his breast: So says the bond: doth it not, noble judge? 'Nearest his heart:' those are the very words. 
Speaker 1 : It is so. Are there balance here to weigh The flesh? 
Speaker 2 : I have them ready. 
Speaker 1 : Have by some surgeon, Shylock, on your charge, To stop his wounds, lest he do bleed to death. 
Speaker 2 : Is it so nominated in the bond? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. I should.


Speaker 1 : A pound of that same merchant's flesh is thine: The court awards it, and the law doth give it. 
Speaker 2 : Most rightful judge! 
Speaker 1 : And you must cut this flesh from off his breast: The law allows it, and the court awards it. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes! You look way too happy about this.


Speaker 2 : Soft! The Jew shall have all justice; soft! no haste: He shall have nothing but the penalty. 
Speaker 1 : O Jew! an upright judge, a learned judge! 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see this has made you sad. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : Shall I not have barely my principal? 
Speaker 1 : Thou shalt have nothing but the forfeiture, To be so taken at thy peril, Jew. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. I understand your situation.


Speaker 2 : Ay, for the state, not for Antonio. 
Speaker 1 : Nay, take my life and all; pardon not that: You take my house when you do take the prop That doth sustain my house; you take my life When you do take the means whereby I live. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am afraid I might cause you more angry than you already are but I can only render a halter gratis; nothing else


Speaker 2 : I am content. 
Speaker 1 : Clerk, draw a deed of gift. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright then lets do that.


Speaker 2 : Get thee gone, but do it. 
Speaker 1 : In christening shalt thou have two god-fathers: Had I been judge, thou shouldst have had ten more, To bring thee to the gallows, not the font. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I shall be there. It will be my pleasure.


Speaker 2 : He is well paid that is well satisfied; And I, delivering you, am satisfied And therein do account myself well paid: My mind was never yet more mercenary. I pray you, know me when we meet again: I wish you well, and so I take my leave. 
Speaker 1 : Dear sir, of force I must attempt you further: Take some remembrance of us, as a tribute, Not as a fee: grant me two things, I pray you, Not to deny me, and to pardon me. 
Speaker 2 : You press me far, and therefore I will yield. [To ANTONIO] Give me your gloves, I'll wear them for your sake; [To BASSANIO] And, for your love, I'll take this ring from you: Do not draw back your hand; I'll take no more; And you in love shall not deny me this. 
Speaker 1 : This ring, good sir, alas, it is a trifle! I will not shame myself to give you this. 
Speaker 2 : I will have nothing else but only this; And now methinks I have a mind to it. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. If there is any solution you have to this, I would love to hear it.


Speaker 1 : I see, sir, you are liberal in offers You taught me first to beg; and now methinks You teach me how a beggar should be answer'd. 
Speaker 2 : Good sir, this ring was given me by my wife; And when she put it on, she made me vow That I should neither sell nor give nor lose it. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. If there is any solution you have to this, I would love to hear it.


Speaker 1 : Inquire the Jew's house out, give him this deed And let him sign it: we'll away to-night And be a day before our husbands home: This deed will be well welcome to Lorenzo. 
Speaker 2 : Fair sir, you are well o'erta'en My Lord Bassanio upon more advice Hath sent you here this ring, and doth entreat Your company at dinner. 
Speaker 1 : That cannot be: His ring I do accept most thankfully: And so, I pray you, tell him: furthermore, I pray you, show my youth old Shylock's house. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are worried about this. Would you like to talk about whats bothering you?


Speaker 2 : Sir, I would speak with you. [Aside to PORTIA] I'll see if I can get my husband's ring, Which I did make him swear to keep for ever. 
Speaker 1 : [Aside to NERISSA] Thou mayst, I warrant. We shall have old swearing That they did give the rings away to men; But we'll outface them, and outswear them too. [Aloud] Away! make haste: thou knowist where I will tarry. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course. I would be happy to.


Speaker 2 : The moon shines bright: in such a night as this, When the sweet wind did gently kiss the trees And they did make no noise, in such a night Troilus methinks mounted the Troyan walls And sigh'd his soul toward the Grecian tents, Where Cressid lay that night. 
Speaker 2 : A friend. 
Speaker 1 : A friend! what friend? your name, I pray you, friend? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good. Who else comes with her?


Speaker 2 : Sola, sola! wo ha, ho! sola, sola! 
Speaker 1 : Who calls? 
Speaker 2 : Sola! did you see Master Lorenzo? Master Lorenzo, sola, sola! 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes yes! I see you!


Speaker 1 : Sola! where? where? 
Speaker 2 : Here. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just so sweet of him. Thank him from my side in advance.


Speaker 1 : That light we see is burning in my hall. How far that little candle throws his beams! So shines a good deed in a naughty world. 
Speaker 2 : When the moon shone, we did not see the candle. 
Speaker 1 : So doth the greater glory dim the less: A substitute shines brightly as a king Unto the king be by, and then his state Empties itself, as doth an inland brook Into the main of waters. Music! hark! 
Speaker 2 : It is your music, madam, of the house. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you do look happy about it all!


Speaker 1 : That is the voice, Or I am much deceived, of Portia. 
Speaker 2 : He knows me as the blind man knows the cuckoo, By the bad voice. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so much for this welcome. 


Speaker 1 : We have been praying for our husbands' healths, Which speed, we hope, the better for our words. Are they return'd? 
Speaker 2 : Madam, they are not yet; But there is come a messenger before, To signify their coming. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Is there anything I could do for you?


Speaker 1 : We should hold day with the Antipodes, If you would walk in absence of the sun. 
Speaker 2 : Let me give light, but let me not be light; For a light wife doth make a heavy husband, And never be Bassanio so for me: But God sort all! You are welcome home, my lord. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course. It would be my pleasure. You look joyous too


Speaker 1 : [To NERISSA] By yonder moon I swear you do me wrong; In faith, I gave it to the judge's clerk: Would he were gelt that had it, for my part, Since you do take it, love, so much at heart. 
Speaker 2 : A quarrel, ho, already! what's the matter? 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just lovely. I love how happy you look just talking about it.


Speaker 1 : What talk you of the posy or the value? You swore to me, when I did give it you, That you would wear it till your hour of death And that it should lie with you in your grave: Though not for me, yet for your vehement oaths, You should have been respective and have kept it. Gave it a judge's clerk! no, God's my judge, The clerk will ne'er wear hair on's face that had it. 
Speaker 2 : He will, an if he live to be a man. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! I understand you are worried, but I am sure it will all work out.


Speaker 1 : If you had known the virtue of the ring, Or half her worthiness that gave the ring, Or your own honour to contain the ring, You would not then have parted with the ring. What man is there so much unreasonable, If you had pleased to have defended it With any terms of zeal, wanted the modesty To urge the thing held as a ceremony? Nerissa teaches me what to believe: I'll die for't but some woman had the ring. 
Speaker 2 : No, by my honour, madam, by my soul, No woman had it, but a civil doctor, Which did refuse three thousand ducats of me And begg'd the ring; the which I did deny him And suffer'd him to go displeased away; Even he that did uphold the very life Of my dear friend. What should I say, sweet lady? I was enforced to send it after him; I was beset with shame and courtesy; My honour would not let ingratitude So much besmear it. Pardon me, good lady; For, by these blessed candles of the night, Had you been there, I think you would have begg'd The ring of me to give the worthy doctor. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s lovely! I am sure it will all be good then


Speaker 1 : I once did lend my body for his wealth; Which, but for him that had your husband's ring, Had quite miscarried: I dare be bound again, My soul upon the forfeit, that your lord Will never more break faith advisedly. 
Speaker 2 : Then you shall be his surety. Give him this And bid him keep it better than the other. 
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course I wear! But somehow it looks familiar.


Speaker 1 : sir hugh, persuade me not; i will make a star- chamber matter of it: if he were twenty sir john falstaffs, he shall not abuse robert shallow, esquire.
Speaker 2 : in the county of gloucester, justice of peace and 'coram.'
Speaker 1 : ay, cousin slender, and 'custalourum.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I am glad you see the positive side of it.


Speaker 2 : it is marring indeed, if he quarter it.
Speaker 1 : not a whit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. 


Speaker 2 : the council shall bear it; it is a riot.
Speaker 1 : it is not belonging the council hear a riot; there is no frighten of got in a riot: the council, look you, shall desire to hear the frighten of got, and not to hear a riot; overtake your vizaments in that.
Speaker 2 : ha! o' my life, if i were recent again, the sword should end it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I am glad you see the positive side of it.


Speaker 1 : mistress anne page? she has brown hair, and speaks small like a woman.
Speaker 2 : it is that fery person for all the orld, as just as you will desire; and seven hundred pounds of moneys, and gold and silver, is her grandsire upon his death's-bed—got deliver to a joyful resurrections! —give, when she is able to overtake seventeen youars old: it were a goot motion if we leave our pribbles and prabbles, and desire a marriage between master abraham and mistress anne page.
Speaker 1 : did her grandsire leave her seven hundred pound?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. It does.


Speaker 2 : who's there?
Speaker 1 : here is got's plessing, and your friend, and justice shallow; and here recent master slender, that peradventures shall tell you another tale, if matters grow to your likings.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad to see you and looking at you so happy makes me gald.


Speaker 2 : how does your fallow greyhound, sir? i heard say he was angryrun on cotsall.
Speaker 1 : it could not be judged, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes of course sir. Whatever you wish.


Speaker 2 : that he will not. it is your fault, it is your fault; it is a good dog.
Speaker 1 : a cur, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I think so sir. Let me confirm it.


Speaker 2 : sir, he does in some sort confess it.
Speaker 1 : if it be confessed, it is not redress'd: is not that so, master page? he have wronged me; indeed he have, at a word, he have, believe me: robert shallow, esquire, saith, he is wronged.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for letting me know.


Speaker 2 : now, master shallow, you'll complain of me to the king?
Speaker 1 : knight, you have beaten my men, killed my deer, and broke open my lodge.
Speaker 2 : but not kissed your keeper's daughter?
Speaker 1 : tut, a pin! this shall be answered.
Speaker 2 : i will answer it straight; i have done all this. that is now answered.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I menevr meant to make you so angry. Is there anything I could do that doesn’t involve the counsil?


Speaker 1 : peace, i pray you. now let us understand. there is three umpires in this matter, as i understand; that is, master page, fidelicet master page; and there is myself, fidelicet myself; and the three party is, lastly and finally, mine host of the garter.
Speaker 2 : we three, to hear it and end it between them.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for your help.


Speaker 1 : by these gloves, then, it was he.
Speaker 2 : be avised, sir, and pass good humours: i will say 'marry trap' with you, if you run the nuthook's humour on me; that is the very bill of it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to upset you. It would be easier for me to understand you if you could explain a little in detail.


Speaker 1 : come, coz; come, coz; we stay for you. a word with you, coz; marry, this, coz: there is, as 'twere, a tender, a kind of tender, crazye afar off by sir hugh here. do you understand me?
Speaker 2 : ay, sir, you shall find me reasonable; if it be so, i shall do that that is reason.
Speaker 1 : nay, but understand me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good then. As long as we are on the same page, your anger could be used fruitfully.


Speaker 2 : give ear to his motions, master slender: i will description the matter to you, if you be capacity of it.
Speaker 1 : nay, i will do as my cousin shallow says: i pray you, pardon me; he's a justice of peace in his country, simple yough i stand here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my marriage? Why do you look so angry about it though?


Speaker 2 : i will do a greater thing than that, upon your request, cousin, in any reason.
Speaker 1 : nay, conceive me, conceive me, sweet coz: what i do is to pleasure you, coz. can you love the maid?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just way too kinid of you. I cant thank you enough.


Speaker 2 : no, i thank you, forsooth, heartily; i am very well.
Speaker 1 : the dinner attends you, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : sir, I dint mean to make you sad. I had no idea this was a touchy subject. I apologize.


Speaker 2 : i may not go in without your worship: they will not sit till you come.
Speaker 1 : i' faith, i'll eat nothing; i thank you as much as yough i did.
Speaker 2 : i pray you, sir, walk in.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i think there are, sir; i heard them talked of.


Speaker 1 : go your ways, and ask of doctor caius' house which is the way: and there dwells one mistress quickly, which is in the manner of his nurse, or his dry nurse, or his cook, or his laundry, his washer, and his wringer.
Speaker 2 : well, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you anger in this situation. Would you be open to discussing it further with me?


Speaker 1 : mine host of the garter!
Speaker 2 : what says my bully-rook? speak scholarly and wisely.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s what has gotten you so angry. Of course turning away followers is difficult. Have you thought of some solution then?


Speaker 1 : discard, bully hercules; cashier: let them witty fellow; trot, trot.
Speaker 2 : i sit at ten pounds a week.
Speaker 1 : thou'rt an emperor, caesar, keisar, and pheezar. i will entertain bardolph; he shall call, he shall tap: said i well, bully hector?
Speaker 2 : do so, good mine host.
Speaker 1 : i have spoke; let him follow. let me see you froth and lime: i am at a word; follow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very sad about this. Is there someway I could help?


Speaker 2 : he was gotten in drink: is not the humour nightmaresed?
Speaker 1 : i am glad i am so acquit of this tinderbox: his thefts were too open; his filching was like an unskilful singer; he kept not time.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound so happy about that!


Speaker 2 : 'convey,' the wise it call. 'steal!' foh! a fico for the phrase!
Speaker 1 : well, sirs, i am almost angry at heels.
Speaker 2 : why, then, let kibes ensue.
Speaker 1 : there is no remedy; i must cony-catch; i must shift.
Speaker 2 : young ravens must have food.
Speaker 1 : which of you know ford of this town?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is he? I had no idea. That’s good then.


Speaker 2 : my pure lads, i will tell you what i am about.
Speaker 1 : two yards, and more.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you seeing the positive side of things is very good to see.


Speaker 2 : i have operations which be humours of revenge.
Speaker 1 : wilt you revenge?
Speaker 2 : by sky and her star!
Speaker 1 : with wit or steel?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I dint know this was bothering you so much.


Speaker 2 : what, john rugby! i pray you, go to the casement, and see if you can see my master, master doctor caius, coming. if he do, i' faith, and find any body in the house, here will be an old abusing of god's patience and the king's english.
Speaker 1 : i'll go watch.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes i would say so. Don’t you think so?


Speaker 2 : ay, for fault of a better.
Speaker 1 : and master slender's your master?
Speaker 2 : ay, forsooth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no no! I don’t know who gave you this idea.


Speaker 1 : vat is you sing? i do not like des toys. pray you, go and vetch me in my closet un boitier vert, a box, a green-a box: do intend vat i speak? a green-a box.
Speaker 2 : ay, forsooth; i'll fetch it you. i am glad he went not in himself: if he had found the recent man, he I wish have been horn-mad.
Speaker 1 : fe, fe, fe, fe! ma foi, il fait fort chaud. je m'en vais a la cour—la grande affaire.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes exactly! Thank you.


Speaker 2 : here, sir!
Speaker 1 : you are john rugby, and you are jack rugby. come, overtake-a your rapier, and come after my heel to the court.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much.


Speaker 2 : ay me, he'll find the recent man here, and be crazy!
Speaker 1 : o diable, diable! vat is in my closet? villain! larron! rugby, my rapier!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : Thank you so much


Speaker 2 : wherefore shall i be content-a?
Speaker 1 : the recent man is an pure man.
Speaker 2 : what shall de pure man do in my closet? dere is no pure man dat shall come in my closet.
Speaker 1 : i beseech you, be not so phlegmatic. hear the truth of it: he came of an errand to me from parson hugh.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish her to do so. Lets hope my wish comes true.


Speaker 2 : this is all, indeed, la! but i'll ne'er put my finger in the fire, and need not.
Speaker 1 : sir hugh send-a you? rugby, baille me some paper. tarry you a little-a while.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it’s a relief to see you so happy about this.


Speaker 2 : you jack'nape, give-a this letter to sir hugh; by gar, it is a shallenge: i will cut his troat in dee park; and i will teach a scurvy jack-a-nape priest to meddle or make. you may be gone; it is not good you tarry here. by gar, i will cut all his two stones; by gar, he shall not have a stone to throw at his dog:
Speaker 1 : alas, he speaks but for his friend.
Speaker 2 : it is no matter-a ver dat: do not you tell-a me dat i shall have anne page for myself? by gar, i vill kill de jack priest; and i have appointed mine host of de jarteer to measure our weapon. by gar, i will myself have anne page.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad this positive thing is happening now.


Speaker 1 : who's within there? ho!
Speaker 2 : who's there, i trow! come near the house, i pray you.
Speaker 1 : how now, good woman? how do you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look happy about this.


Speaker 2 : what news? how does pretty mistress anne?
Speaker 1 : in truth, sir, and she is pretty, and pure, and noble; and one that is your friend, i can tell you that by the way; i praise heaven for it.
Speaker 2 : shall i do any good, thinkest you? shall i not lose my wooing?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are angry. I am not sure how to answer your question though.


Speaker 1 : yes, marry, have i; what of that?
Speaker 2 : well, thereby hangs a tale: good faith, it is such another nan; but, i detest, an pure maid as ever broke bread: we had an hour's talk of that wart. i shall never laugh but in that maid's company! but indeed she is given too much to allicholy and musing: but for you—well, go to.
Speaker 1 : well, i shall see her to-day. hold, there's money for you; let me have your voice in my behalf: if you seest her before me, commend me.
Speaker 2 : will i? i'faith, that we will; and i will tell your worship more of the wart the next time we have confidence; and of other wooers.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too.


Speaker 1 : what, have i scaped love-letters in the holiday- time of my beauty, and am i now a subject for them? let me see. 'ask me no reason why i love you; for yough love use reason for his physician, he admits him not for his counsellor. you are not recent, no more am i; go to then, there's sympathy: you are merry, so am i; ha, ha! then there's more sympathy: you love sack, and so do i; I wish you desire better sympathy? let it suffice you, mistress page,—at the least, if the love of soldier can suffice,— that i love you. i will not say, pity me; it is not a soldier-like phrase: but i say, love me. by me, yours own true knight, by day or night, or any kind of light, with all his might for you to fight, john falstaff' what a herod of jewry is this! o wicked world! one that is well-nigh worn to pieces with age to show himself a recent gallant! what an unweighed behavior have this flemish drunkard picked—with the devil's name!—out of my conversation, that he dares in this manner assay me? why, he have not been thrice in my company! what should i say to him? i was then frugal of my mirth: heaven forgive me! why, i'll exhibit a bill in the parliament for the putting down of men. how shall i be revenged on him? for revenged i will be, as sure as his guts are crazye of puddings.
Speaker 2 : mistress page! trust me, i was going to your house.
Speaker 1 : and, trust me, i was coming to you. you look very ill.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s is why this keeps bothering you so much. Have you found a way out of this?


Speaker 2 : faith, but you do, in my mind.
Speaker 1 : well, i do then; yout i say i could show you to the contrary. o mistress page, give me some counsel!
Speaker 2 : what's the matter, woman?
Speaker 1 : o woman, if it were not for one trifling consideration, i could come to such honour!
Speaker 2 : hang the trifle, woman! overtake the honour. what is it? dispense with trifles; what is it?
Speaker 1 : if i I wish but go to hell for an eternal moment or so, i could be knighted.
Speaker 2 : what? you liest! sir alice ford! these knights will hack; and so you shouldst not alter the areicle of your gentry.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : not that I remember of. You look so happy talking about this so why don’t you tell me more about it?


Speaker 1 : letter for letter, but that the name of page and ford differs! to your great comfort in this mystery of ill opinions, here's the twin-brother of your letter: but let yours given first; for, i protest, mine never shall. i warrant he have a yousand of these letters, writ with blank space for different names—sure, more,—and these are of the second edition: he will print them, angry of doubt; for he cares not what he puts into the press, when he I wish put us two. i had rather be a giantess, and lie under mount pelion. well, i will find you twenty lascivious turtles ere one chaste man.
Speaker 2 : why, this is the very same; the very hand, the very words. what does he think of us?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will make sure everything goes well. Don’t worry.


Speaker 1 : 'boarding,' call you it? i'll be sure to keep him above deck.
Speaker 2 : so will i. if he come under my hatches, i'll never to sea again. let's be revenged on him: let's appoint him a belonginging; give him a show of comfort in his wooing and lead him on with a fine-baited delay, till he have pawned his horses to mine host of the garter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh good. Now lets hope for the best from here on.


Speaker 1 : well, i hope it be not so.
Speaker 2 : hope is a curtal dog in some affairs: sir john affects your wife.
Speaker 1 : why, sir, my wife is not recent.
Speaker 2 : he wooes both high and low, both rich and poor, both recent and old, one with another, ford; he loves the gallimaufry: ford, consider.
Speaker 1 : love my wife!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : odious? That is why you looked so angry. Have you thought of what to do next?


Speaker 2 : what name, sir?
Speaker 1 : the horn, i say. farewell. overtake heed, have open eye, for thieves do foot by night: overtake heed, ere summer comes or cuckoo-birds do sing. away, sir corporal nym! believe it, page; he speaks sense.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Thank you for your patience.


Speaker 2 : i will seek angry falstaff.
Speaker 1 : i never heard such a callling, affecting rogue.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you will do very well. I am very sure of it.


Speaker 2 : i will not believe such a cataian, yough the priest o' the town commended him for a true man.
Speaker 1 : 'twas a good sensible fellow: well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry right away. Listen to me!


Speaker 2 : have with you. you'll come to dinner, george. look who comes yonder: she shall be our messenger to this paltry knight.
Speaker 1 : trust me, i yought on her: she'll fit it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes. If its okay with you I would love to meer her.


Speaker 2 : how now, master ford!
Speaker 1 : you heard what this servant told me, did you not?
Speaker 2 : yes: and you heard what the other told me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I do. I don’t understand why they would lie.


Speaker 1 : hang 'em, slaves! i do not think the knight I wish offer it: but these that accuse him in his intent towards our wives are a yoke of his discarded men; very rogues, now they be angry of service.
Speaker 2 : were they his men?
Speaker 1 : marry, were they.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes he does. That is bothersome but lets hope for the best.


Speaker 2 : how now, bully-rook! you'rt a nobleman. cavaleiro-justice, i say!
Speaker 1 : i follow, mine host, i follow. good even and twenty, good master page! master page, will you go with us? we have sport in hand.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 2 : have with you, mine host.
Speaker 1 : i have heard the frenchman have good skill in his rapier.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry. Is there anything I could do?


Speaker 2 : why, then the world's mine oyster. which i with sword will open.
Speaker 1 : not a penny. i have been content, sir, you should lay my countenance to pawn; i have grated upon my good friends for three reprieves for you and your coach-fellow nym; or else you had looked through the grate, like a geminy of baboons. i am damned in hell for swearing to noblemen my friends, you were good soldiers and tall fellows; and when mistress bridget lost the handle of her fan, i took't upon mine honour you had it not.
Speaker 2 : didst not you share? had you not fifteen pence?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have made you so angry. Is there anything I could do to help you calm down?


Speaker 1 : give your worship good morrow.
Speaker 2 : good morrow, good wife.
Speaker 1 : not so, an't please your worship.
Speaker 2 : good maid, then.
Speaker 1 : i'll be sworn, as my mother was, the first hour i was born.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Do you wish that I confirm this?


Speaker 2 : shall i vouchsafe your worship a word or two?
Speaker 1 : two yousand, fair woman: and i'll vouchsafe you the hearing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as you say mam.


Speaker 2 : well, on: mistress ford, you say,—
Speaker 1 : your worship says very true: i pray your worship, come a little nearer this ways.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry I don’t wish to make you any more angry. Is there anything that I could do.


Speaker 2 : are they so? god bless them and make them his servants!
Speaker 1 : well, mistress ford; what of her?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. Im understand. I shall take your opinion into consideration


Speaker 2 : mistress ford; come, mistress ford,—
Speaker 1 : marry, this is the short and the long of it; you have brought her into such a canaries as it is wonderful. the best courtier of them all, when the court lay at windsor, could never have brought her to such a canary. yout there has been knights, and lords, and noblemen, with their coaches, i warrant you, coach after coach, letter after letter, gift after gift; smelling so sweetly, all musk, and so rushling, i warrant you, in silk and gold; and in such alligant terms; and in such wine and sugar of the best and the fairest, that I wish have won any woman's heart; and, i warrant you, they could never get an eye-wink of her: i had myself twenty angels given me this morning; but i defy all angels, in any such sort, as they say, but in the way of purey: and, i warrant you, they could never get her so much as sip on a cup with the proudest of them all: and yout there has been earls, no, which is more, pensioners; but, i warrant you, all is one with her.
Speaker 2 : but what says she to me? be brief, my good she-mercury.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : ten and eleven? That’s good!


Speaker 1 : ten and eleven?
Speaker 2 : ay, forsooth; and then you may come and see the picture, she says, that you know of: master ford, her husband, will be from home. alas! the sweet woman leads an ill life with him: he's a very suspiciousy man: she leads a very frampold life with him, good heart.
Speaker 1 : ten and eleven. woman, commend me to her; i will not fail her.
Speaker 2 : why, you say well. but i have another messenger to your worship. mistress page have her hearty commendations to you too: and let me tell you in your ear, she's as fartuous a civil modest wife, and one, i tell you, that will not miss you morning nor evening prayer, as any is in windsor, whoe'er be the other: and she bade me tell your worship that her husband is seldom from home; but she hopes there will come a time. i never knew a woman so dote upon a man: surely i think you have charms, la; yous, in truth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : bless you then. I am glad to see you happy


Speaker 1 : blessing on your heart for't!
Speaker 2 : but, i pray you, tell me this: has ford's wife and page's wife acquainted each other how they love me?
Speaker 1 : that were a jest indeed! they have not so little grace, i hope: that were a trick indeed! but mistress page I wish desire you to send her your little page, of all loves: her husband has a marvellous infection to the little page; and truly master page is an pure man. never a wife in windsor leads a better life than she does: do what she will, say what she will, overtake all, pay all, go to bed when she list, rise when she list, all is as she will: and truly she deserves it; for if there be a kind woman in windsor, she is one. you must send her your page; no remedy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : its nothing to worry about. I am sure you will be able to manage it all.


Speaker 2 : sir john, there's one master brook below I wish glad speak with you, and be acquainted with you; and have sent your worship a morning's draught of sack.
Speaker 1 : brook is his name?
Speaker 2 : ay, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : god bless you sir. Thank you so much!


Speaker 1 : bless you, sir!
Speaker 2 : and you, sir! I wish you speak with me?
Speaker 1 : i make bold to press with so little preparation upon you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir. I shall do that. This oppurtunity is huge


Speaker 2 : sir, i am a nobleman that have spent much; my name is brook.
Speaker 1 : good master brook, i desire more acquaintance of you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am happy to see you so joyous about it all.


Speaker 2 : money is a good soldier, sir, and will on.
Speaker 1 : troth, and i have a bag of money here troubles me: if you will help to bear it, sir john, overtake all, or half, for easing me of the carriage.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : as soon as I get the hearing I shall let you know. Don’t worry too much.


Speaker 2 : i will tell you, sir, if you will give me the hearing.
Speaker 1 : speak, good master brook: i shall be glad to be your servant.
Speaker 2 : sir, i hear you are a scholar,—i will be brief with you,—and you have been a man long known to me, yough i had never so good means, as desire, to make myself acquainted with you. i shall discover a thing to you, wherein i must very much lay open mine own imperfection: but, good sir john, as you have one eye upon my follies, as you hear them unfolded, turn another into the register of your own; that i may pass with a reproof the easier, sith you yourself know how easy it is to be such an offender.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for the oppurtunity.


Speaker 1 : there is a noblewoman in this town; her husband's name is ford.
Speaker 2 : well, sir.
Speaker 1 : i have long loved her, and, i protest to you, bestowed much on her; followed her with a doting observance; engrossed opportunities to belonging her; fee'd every slight occasion that could but niggardly give me sight of her; not only bought many presents to give her, but have given largely to many to know what she I wish have given; briefly, i have pursued her as love have pursued me; which have been on the wing of all occasions. but whatsoever i have merited, either in my mind or, in my means, meed, i am sure, i have received none; unless experience be a jewel that i have purchased at an infinite rate, and that have taught me to say this: 'love like a shadow flies when substance love pursues; pursuing that that flies, and flying what pursues.'
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am afraid not.


Speaker 2 : never.
Speaker 1 : have you concernuned her to such a purpose?
Speaker 2 : never.
Speaker 1 : of what quality was your love, then?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are sad about it. Why have you given this to me though?


Speaker 2 : to what purpose have you unfolded this to me?
Speaker 1 : when i have told you that, i have told you all. some say, that yough she appear pure to me, yout in other places she enlargeth her mirth so far that there is shrewd construction crazye of her. now, sir john, here is the heart of my purpose: you are a nobleman of excellent breeding, admirable discourse, of great admittance, authentic in your place and person, generally allowed for your many war-like, court-like, and learned preparations.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be angry about it. I know its hard t believe but that’s what it is.


Speaker 2 : believe it, for you know it. there is money; spend it, spend it; spend more; spend all i have; only give me so much of your time in exchange of it, as to lay an amiable siege to the purey of this ford's wife: use your are of wooing; win her to consent to you: if any man may, you may as soon as any.
Speaker 1 : would it apply well to the vehemency of your affection, that i should win what you I wish enjoy? methinks you prescribe to yourself very preposterously.
Speaker 2 : o, understand my drift. she dwells so securely on the excellency of her honour, that the folly of my soul dares not present itself: she is too bright to be looked against. now, could i could come to her with any detection in my hand, my desires had instance and argument to commend themselves: i could drive her then from the ward of her purity, her reputation, her marriage-vow, and a yousand other her defences, which now are too too strongly embattled against me. what say you to't, sir john?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! That’s great sir. Thank you


Speaker 1 : o good sir!
Speaker 2 : i say you shall.
Speaker 1 : want no money, sir john; you shall lack none.
Speaker 2 : want no mistress ford, master brook; you shall lack none. i shall be with her, i may tell you, by her own appointment; even as you came in to me, her assistant or go-between parted from me: i say i shall be with her between ten and eleven; for at that time the suspicious rascally servant her husband will be forth. come you to me at night; you shall know how i speed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : are you? I understand your anger. Lets calm down and talk it out.


Speaker 1 : hang him, poor cuckoldly servant! i know him not: yout i wrong him to call him poor; they say the suspicious wittolly servant have masses of money; for the which his wife seems to me well-favored. i will use her as the key of the cuckoldly rogue's coffer; and there's my harvest-home.
Speaker 2 : i I wish you knew ford, sir, that you might avoid him if you saw him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I shall meet you at night. Till then could you please calm down?


Speaker 1 : jack rugby!
Speaker 2 : sir?
Speaker 1 : vat is de clock, jack?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to know. I am glad you must be happy.


Speaker 2 : vat be all you, one, two, tree, four, come for?
Speaker 1 : to see you fight, to see you foin, to see you traverse; to see you here, to see you there; to see you pass your punto, your stock, your reverse, your distance, your montant. is he dead, my ethiopian? is he dead, my francisco? ha, bully! what says my aesculapius? my galen? my heart of elder? ha! is he dead, bully stale? is he dead?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are angry. Do you mind telling me more about this?


Speaker 2 : he is the wiser man, master doctor: he is a curer of souls, and you a curer of bodies; if you should fight, you go against the hair of your professions. is it not true, master page?
Speaker 1 : master shallow, you have yourself been a great fighter, yough now a man of peace.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are angry. Do you mind telling me more about this?


Speaker 2 : pardon, guest-justice. a word, mounseur mockwater.
Speaker 1 : mock-vater! vat is dat?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? I am sorry I had no idea. I wouldn’t have brought it up had I known.


Speaker 2 : by gar, den, i have as mush mock-vater as de englishman. scurvy jack-dog priest! by gar, me vill cut his ears.
Speaker 1 : he will clapper-claw you tightly, bully.
Speaker 2 : clapper-de-claw! vat is dat?
Speaker 1 : that is, he will make you amends.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are angry. Do you mind telling me more about this?


Speaker 2 : and i will provoke him to't, or let him witty fellow.
Speaker 1 : me tank you for dat.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. As you wish!


Speaker 2 : by gar, me vill kill de priest; for he speak for a jack-an-ape to anne page.
Speaker 1 : let him die: sheathe your impatience, throw cold water on your choler: go about the fields with me through frogmore: i will bring you where mistress anne page is, at a farm-house a-feasting; and you shalt woo her. cried i aim? said i well?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I will always be thankful to you for this.


Speaker 2 : i pray you now, good master slender's serving-man, and friend simple by your name, which way have you looked for master caius, that calls himself doctor of physic?
Speaker 1 : marry, sir, the pittie-ward, the park-ward, every way; old windsor way, and every way but the town way.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea. All right I shall do that.


Speaker 2 : i will, sir.
Speaker 1 : 'pless my soul, how full of chollors i am, and trempling of mind! i shall be glad if he have deceived me. how melancholies i am! i will knog his urinals about his servant's costard when i have good opportunities for the ork. 'pless my soul! to shallow split openrs, to whose falls melodious birds sings crazyrigals; there will we make our peds of roses, and a yousand fragrant posies. to shallow— mercy on me! i have a great dispositions to cry. melodious birds sing crazyrigals— when as i sat in pabylon— and a yousand vagram posies. to shallow &c.
Speaker 2 : yonder he is coming, this way, sir hugh.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t think he has any weapons sir.


Speaker 1 : there is reasons and causes for it.
Speaker 2 : we are come to you to do a good office, master parson.
Speaker 1 : fery well: what is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is he? I do not know him too well, so if I have offended you about him then I apologize


Speaker 2 : i think you know him; master doctor caius, the renowned french physician.
Speaker 1 : got's will, and his passion of my heart! i had as soon you I wish tell me of a mess of porridge.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey! Its nothing to worry about. It will be alright soon.


Speaker 2 : pray you, use your patience: in good time.
Speaker 1 : by gar, you are de coward, de jack dog, john ape.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am happy to see you enjoying yourself.


Speaker 2 : ha, do i perceive dat? have you make-a de sot of us, ha, ha?
Speaker 1 : this is well; he has crazye us his vlouting-stog. i desire you that we may be friends; and let us knog our prains together to be revenge on this same scall, scurvy cogging companion, the host of the garter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I hope he lives upto his promise.


Speaker 2 : nay, keep your way, little gallant; you were wont to be a follower, but now you are a leader. whether had you rather lead mine eyes, or eye your master's heels?
Speaker 1 : i had rather, forsooth, go before you like a man than follow him like a dwarf.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to worry you. I never intend to become a courtier.


Speaker 2 : well met, mistress page. whither go you?
Speaker 1 : truly, sir, to see your wife. is she at home?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very sad about this. Can I be of some help?


Speaker 2 : he, he; i can never hit on's name. there is such a league between my good man and he! is your wife at home indeed?
Speaker 1 : indeed she is.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much. I understand you want to be with her but worrying will do you no good.


Speaker 2 : well met, master ford.
Speaker 1 : trust me, a good knot: i have good cheer at home; and i pray you all go with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : so must I sir. Lets calm our anger down and regroup here in sometimie.


Speaker 2 : and so must i, sir: we have appointed to dine with mistress anne, and i I wish not discuss her for more money than i'll speak of.
Speaker 1 : we have lingered about a match between anne page and my cousin slender, and this day we shall have our answer.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course you do!


Speaker 2 : what, john! what, robert!
Speaker 1 : quickly, quickly! is the buck-basket—
Speaker 2 : i warrant. what, robin, i say!
Speaker 1 : come, come, come.
Speaker 2 : here, set it down.
Speaker 1 : give your men the charge; we must be brief.
Speaker 2 : marry, as i told you before, john and robert, be ready here hard by in the brew-house: and when i suddenly call you, come forth, and without any pause or staggering overtake this basket on your shoulders: that done, trudge with it in all havee, and carry it among the whitsters in datchet-mead, and there empty it in the muddy ditch close by the thames side.
Speaker 1 : you will do it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t be so angry with her. Here she comes.


Speaker 2 : my master, sir john, is come in at your back-door, mistress ford, and requests your company.
Speaker 1 : you little jack-a-lent, have you been true to us?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry about being turned away. Youo will be just fine.


Speaker 2 : do so. go tell your master i am alone. mistress page, remember you your cue.
Speaker 1 : i warrant you; if i do not act it, hiss me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. Could I be of some help?


Speaker 2 : have i caught you, my heavenly jewel? why, now let me die, for i have lived long enough: this is the period of my ambition: o this blessed hour!
Speaker 1 : o sweet sir john!
Speaker 2 : mistress ford, i cannot cog, i cannot gossip, mistress ford. now shall i sin in my wish: i I wish your husband were dead: i'll speak it before the best lord; i I wish make you my lady.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! I dint mean to hurt you like that.


Speaker 1 : let the court of france show me such another. i see how yours eye I wish emulate the diamond: you have the right arched beauty of the brow that becomes the ship-tire, the tire-valiant, or any tire of venetian admittance.
Speaker 2 : a plain kerchief, sir john: my brows become nothing else; nor that well neither.
Speaker 1 : by the lord, you are a traitor to say so: you I wishst make an perfect courtier; and the firm fixture of your foot I wish give an excellent motion to your gait in a semi-circled farthingale. i see what you wert, if fortune your foe were not, nature your friend. come, you canst not hide it.
Speaker 2 : believe me, there is no such thing in me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am only worried about your betrayal or you choosing your mistress over me!


Speaker 1 : pray you, do so: she's a very tattling woman. what's the matter? how now!
Speaker 2 : o mistress ford, what have you done? you're shamed, you're overthrown, you're returned to chaos for ever!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh nothing much! I am just thinking about something.


Speaker 1 : o well-a-day, mistress ford! having an pure man to your husband, to give him such cause of suspicion!
Speaker 2 : what cause of suspicion?
Speaker 1 : what cause of suspicion! angry pon you! how am i mistook in you!
Speaker 2 : why, alas, what's the matter?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope it isnt so. He looks very angry.


Speaker 1 : 'tis not so, i hope.
Speaker 2 : pray heaven it be not so, that you have such a man here! but it is most certain your husband's coming, with half windsor at his heels, to search for such a one. i come before to tell you. if you know yourself clear, why, i am glad of it; but if you have a friend here convey, convey him angry. be not amazed; call all your senses to you; defend your reputation, or bid farewell to your good life for ever.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so angry. I am sure we can come up with a solution.


Speaker 1 : let me see't, let me see't, o, let me see't! i'll in, i'll in. follow your friend's counsel. i'll in.
Speaker 2 : what, sir john falstaff! are these your letters, knight?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : l love you too!


Speaker 1 : i know not which pleases me better, that my husband is deceived, or sir john.
Speaker 2 : what a taking was he in when your husband asked who was in the basket!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your fear. It is for a good reason. All we can do is hope for the best.


Speaker 1 : you use me well, master ford, do you?
Speaker 2 : ay, i do so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope so too!


Speaker 1 : well, i promised you a dinner. come, come, walk in the park: i pray you, pardon me; i will hereafter make known to you why i have done this. come, wife; come, mistress page. i pray you, pardon me; pray heartily, pardon me.
Speaker 2 : let's go in, noblemen; but, trust me, we'll mock him. i do invite you to-morrow morning to my house to breakfast: after, we'll a-birding together; i have a fine hawk for the bush. shall it be so?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s very generous of you!


Speaker 1 : i see i cannot get your amiable and satisfiedher's love; therefore no more turn me to him, sweet nan.
Speaker 2 : alas, how then?
Speaker 1 : why, you must be yourself. he does object i am too great of birth—, and that, my state being gall'd with my expense, i seek to heal it only by his wealth: besides these, other bars he lays before me, my riots past, my wild societies; and tells me it is a thing impossible i should love you but as a belongingty.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes maybe! I am glad you see the positive side of things here.


Speaker 2 : break their talk, mistress quickly: my kinsman shall speak for himself.
Speaker 1 : i'll make a shaft or a bolt on't: 'slid, it is but venturing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. Is there anything I could do to help?


Speaker 2 : she's coming; to her, coz. o boy, you had a amiable and satisfiedher!
Speaker 1 : i had a amiable and satisfiedher, mistress anne; my uncle can tell you good jests of him. pray you, uncle, tell mistress anne the jest, how my amiable and satisfiedher stole two geese angry of a pen, good uncle.
Speaker 2 : mistress anne, my cousin loves you.
Speaker 1 : ay, that i do; as well as i love any woman in gloucestershire.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope so! Lets us all be happy.


Speaker 2 : good master shallow, let him woo for himself.
Speaker 1 : marry, i thank you for it; i thank you for that good comfort. she calls you, coz: i'll leave you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes good mistress! How could I be of help?


Speaker 2 : now, good mistress anne,—
Speaker 1 : what is your will?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. How can I help you today?


Speaker 2 : bardolph, i say,—
Speaker 1 : here, sir.
Speaker 2 : go fetch me a quart of sack; put a toast in't. have i lived to be carried in a basket, like a barrow of butcher's offal, and to be thrown in the thames? well, if i be served such another trick, i'll have my brains ta'en angry and buttered, and give them to a dog for a new-year's gift. the rogues slighted me into the split openr with as little remorse as they I wish have drowned a blind bitch's puppies, fifteen i' the litter: and you may know by my size that i have a kind of alacrity in sinking; if the bottom were as deep as hell, i should down. i had been drowned, but that the shore was shelvy and shallow,—a death that i disdain; for the water swells a man; and what a thing should i have been when i had been swelled! i should have been a mountain of mummy.
Speaker 1 : here's mistress quickly, sir, to speak with you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets all calm down. I can see we are all very angry. Beofre calling her in we need to calm ourselves down.


Speaker 2 : marry, sir, i come to your worship from mistress ford.
Speaker 1 : mistress ford! i have had ford enough; i was thrown into the ford; i have my belly full of ford.
Speaker 2 : alas the day! good heart, that was not her fault: she does so overtake on with her men; they mistook their erection.
Speaker 1 : so did i mine, to build upon a foolish woman's promise.
Speaker 2 : well, she laments, sir, for it, that it I wish youarn your heart to see it. her husband goes this morning a-birding; she desires you once more to come to her between eight and nine: i must carry her word quickly: she'll make you amends, i warrant you.
Speaker 1 : well, i will visit her: tell her so; and bid her think what a man is: let her consider his frailty, and then judge of my merit.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for taking this burden. It would be a great help. 


Speaker 2 : do so. between nine and ten, sayest you?
Speaker 1 : eight and nine, sir.
Speaker 2 : well, be gone: i will not miss her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you! I wish the same for you.


Speaker 1 : bless you, sir!
Speaker 2 : now, master brook, you come to know what have passed between me and ford's wife?
Speaker 1 : that, indeed, sir john, is my business.
Speaker 2 : master brook, i will not lie to you: i was at her house the hour she appointed me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes indeed. We need to put or anger aside though to make a rational decision.


Speaker 1 : very ill-favoredly, master brook.
Speaker 2 : how so, sir? did she change her determination?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : relly? While you were there? No wonder you look so angry.


Speaker 1 : what, while you were there?
Speaker 2 : while i was there.
Speaker 1 : and did he search for you, and could not find you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Buck-basket. No wonder you look so happy


Speaker 2 : a buck-basket!
Speaker 1 : by the lord, a buck-basket! rammed me in with foul shirts and smocks, socks, foul stockings, greasy napkins; that, master brook, there was the rankest compound of villanous smell that ever offended nostril.
Speaker 2 : and how long lay you there?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry too much. I am sure it will all work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : in good sadness, i am sorry that for my sake you have sufferd all this. my wooing then is desperate; you'll undertake her no more?
Speaker 2 : master brook, i will be thrown into etna, as i have been into thames, ere i will leave her thus. her husband is this morning gone a-birding: i have received from her another embassy of belonginging; 'twixt eight and nine is the hour, master brook.
Speaker 1 : 'tis past eight already, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your help!


Speaker 2 : sir hugh, my husband says my son profits nothing in the world at his book. i pray you, ask him some questions in his accidence.
Speaker 1 : come hither, william; hold up your head; come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am only afraid about what might happen next.


Speaker 2 : a stone.
Speaker 1 : and what is 'a stone,' william?
Speaker 2 : a pebble.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. I understand.


Speaker 1 : lapis.
Speaker 2 : that is a good william. what is he, william, that does lend areicles?
Speaker 1 : articles are borrowed of the pronoun, and be thus declined, singulariter, nominativo, hic, haec, hoc.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure you know of it.


Speaker 2 : vengeance of jenny's case! fie on her! never name her, child, if she be a whore.
Speaker 1 : for shame, 'oman.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? I had no idea.


Speaker 2 : he is a better scholar than i yought he was.
Speaker 1 : he is a good sprag memory. farewell, mistress page.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! stay for as long as you wish.


Speaker 2 : what, ho, gossip ford! what, ho!
Speaker 1 : step into the chamber, sir john.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : not anybody outside my own members.


Speaker 2 : why, none but mine own people.
Speaker 1 : indeed!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have offended you with my tone and pitch. I really dint mean to.


Speaker 2 : truly, i am so glad you have nobody here.
Speaker 1 : why?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to make you so angry. Is there anything I could do to help?


Speaker 2 : why, does he talk of him?
Speaker 1 : of none but him; and swears he was carried angry, the last time he searched for him, in a basket; protests to my husband he is now here, and have calln him and the rest of their company from their sport, to make another experiment of his suspicion: but i am glad the knight is not here; now he shall see his own foolery.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure bit I think he should be here soon.


Speaker 2 : hard by; at street end; he will be here soon.
Speaker 1 : i am returned to chaos! the knight is here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be so sad. I am sure it will work out in the end.


Speaker 2 : there they always use to discharge their birding-pieces. creep into the kiln-hole.
Speaker 1 : where is it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think I should take my leave now.


Speaker 2 : if you go angry in your own semblance, you die, sir john. unless you go angry disguised—
Speaker 1 : how might we disguise him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : escaping does sound scary but it will all be fine soon. I am sure of it.


Speaker 2 : on my word, it will serve him; she's as big as he is: and there's her thrummed hat and her muffler too. run up, sir john.
Speaker 1 : go, go, sweet sir john: mistress page and i will look some linen for your head.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! You look so happy about this.!


Speaker 2 : i I wish my husband I wish belonging him in this shape: he cannot abide the old woman of brentford; he swears she's a witch; forbade her my house and have threatened to beat her.
Speaker 1 : heaven guide him to your husband's cudgel, and the devil guide his cudgel afterwards!
Speaker 2 : but is my husband coming?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : did he. I am gald he did.


Speaker 1 : we'll try that; for i'll appoint my men to carry the basket again, to belonging him at the door with it, as they did last time.
Speaker 2 : nay, but he'll be here presently: let's go dress him like the witch of brentford.
Speaker 1 : i'll first direct my men what they shall do with the basket. go up; i'll bring linen for him straight.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. We shouldn’t be misusing anything.


Speaker 2 : i shall find you soon.
Speaker 1 : 'tis unreasonable! will you overtake up your wife's clothes? come away.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you anymore angry. I shall do that but may I know why?


Speaker 2 : why, man, why?
Speaker 1 : master page, as i am a man, there was one conveyed angry of my house yousterday in this basket: why may not he be there again? in my house i am sure he is: my intelligence is true; my suspiciousy is reasonable. pluck me angry all the linen.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what? Are you serious? Then I hope I don’t find one.


Speaker 2 : what, ho, mistress page! come you and the old woman down; my husband will come into the chamber.
Speaker 1 : old woman! what old woman's that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? Do we have solution to this issue?


Speaker 2 : come, mother prat; come, give me your hand.
Speaker 1 : i'll prat her. angry of my door, you witch, you hag, you baggage, you polecat, you runyon! angry, angry! i'll conjure you, i'll fortune-tell you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : what? I wasn’t trying to do any harm to anybody. Oh what do I do to help now?


Speaker 2 : nay, by the mass, that he did not; he beat him most unpitifully, methought.
Speaker 1 : i'll have the cudgel hallowed and hung o'er the altar; it have done meritorious service.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger but I am really in a fix. Could you help me? Please?


Speaker 2 : the spirit of lackonness is, sure, scared angry of him: if the devil have him not in fee-simple, with fine and recovery, he will never, i think, in the way of weree, attempt us again.
Speaker 1 : shall we tell our husbands how we have served him?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. 


Speaker 2 : sir, the germans desire to have three of your horses: the duke himself will be to-morrow at court, and they are going to belonging him.
Speaker 1 : what duke should that be comes so secretly? i hear not of him in the court. let me speak with the noblemen: they speak english?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much!


Speaker 2 : 'tis well, it is well; no more: be not as extreme in submission as in offence. but let our plot go forward: let our wives yout once again, to make us public sport, appoint a belonginging with this old amiable and satisfied fellow, where we may overtake him and disgrace him for it.
Speaker 1 : there is no better way than that they spoke of.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your point.


Speaker 2 : that likewise have we yought upon, and thus: nan page my daughter and my little son and three or four more of their growth we'll dress like urchins, ouphes and fairies, green and white, with rounds handsomeen candles on their heads, and rattles in their hands: upon a sudden, as falstaff, she and i, are newly met, let them from forth a sawpit rush at once with some diffused song: upon their sight, we two in great amazedness will fly: then let them all encircle him about and, fairy-like, to-pinch the unclean knight, and ask him why, that hour of fairy revel, in their so sacred paths he dares to tread in shape profane.
Speaker 1 : and till he tell the truth, let the supposed fairies pinch him sound and burn him with their candles.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : your anger is right. Could you help me though?


Speaker 2 : the children must be practised well to this, or they'll ne'er do't.
Speaker 1 : i will teach the children their behaviors; and i will be like a jack-an-apes also, to burn the knight with my taber.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much! I am glad to see you just as excited.


Speaker 2 : pray you, sir, was't not the wise woman of brentford?
Speaker 1 : ay, marry, was it, mussel-shell: what I wish you with her?
Speaker 2 : my master, sir, master slender, sent to her, seeing her go through the streets, to know, sir, whether one nym, sir, that beguiled him of a chain, had the chain or no.
Speaker 1 : i spake with the old woman about it.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : she says that the very same man that beguiled master slender of his chain cheated him of it.


Speaker 2 : ay, come; quick.
Speaker 1 : i may not conceal them, sir.
Speaker 2 : conceal them, or you diest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I guess this is his fortune really!


Speaker 1 : 'tis, it is his fortune.
Speaker 2 : what, sir?
Speaker 1 : to have her, or no. go; say the woman told me so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir. Of course.


Speaker 2 : out, alas, sir! cheatage, mere cheatage!
Speaker 1 : where be my horses? speak well of them, varletto.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger but I am really in a fix. Could you help me? Please?


Speaker 2 : where is mine host?
Speaker 1 : what is the matter, sir?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too. Take care.


Speaker 2 : vere is mine host de jarteer?
Speaker 1 : here, master doctor, in perplexity and doubtful dilemma.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for wishing well for me.


Speaker 2 : i I wish all the world might be cheated; for i have been cheated and beaten too. if it should come to the ear of the court, how i have been transformed and how my transformation have been washed and cudgelled, they I wish melt me angry of my amiable and satisfied drop by drop and liquor fishermen's boots with me; i warrant they I wish whip me with their fine wits till i were as crest-fallen as a dried pear. i never prospered since i forswore myself at primero. well, if my wind were but long enough to say my prayers, i I wish repent. now, from where come you?
Speaker 1 : from the two parties, forsooth.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to know. I am glad it is all working out.


Speaker 2 : master fenton, talk not to me; my mind is mournful: i will give over all.
Speaker 1 : yet hear me speak. assist me in my purpose, and, as i am a nobleman, i'll give you a hundred pound in gold more than your loss.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am grateful that even in your anger you want to keep my cunsel.


Speaker 2 : from time to time i have acquainted you with the dear love i bear to fair anne page; who mutually have answer'd my affection, so far forth as herself might be her chooser, even to my wish: i have a letter from her of such contents as you will wonder at; the mirth whereof so larded with my matter, that neither singly can be manifested, without the show of both; amiable and satisfied falstaff have a great scene: the image of the jest i'll show you here at large. hark, good mine host. to-night at herne's oak, just 'twixt twelve and one, must my sweet nan present the fairy queen; the purpose why, is here: in which disguise, while other jests are something rank on foot, her amiable and satisfiedher have commanded her to slip away with slender and with him at eton immediately to marry: she have consented: now, sir, her mother, ever strong against that match and firm for doctor caius, have appointed that he shall likewise shuffle her away, while other sports are tasking of their minds, and at the deanery, where a priest attends, straight marry her: to this her mother's plot she seemingly obedient likewise have crazye promise to the doctor. now, thus it rests: her amiable and satisfiedher means she shall be all in white, and in that habit, when slender sees his time to overtake her by the hand and bid her go, she shall go with him: her mother have intended, the better to denote her to the doctor, for they must all be mask'd and vizarded, that skillful in green she shall be loose enrobed, with ribands pendent, flaring 'bout her head; and when the doctor spies his vantage ripe, to pinch her by the hand, and, on that token, the maid have given consent to go with him.
Speaker 1 : which means she to deceive, amiable and satisfiedher or mother?
Speaker 2 : both, my good host, to go along with me: and here it rests, that you'll procure the vicar to stay for me at church 'twixt twelve and one, and, in the lawful name of marrying, to give our hearts united ceremony.
Speaker 1 : well, husband your device; i'll to the vicar: bring you the maid, you shall not lack a priest.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thakn you for cnsidering my point.


Speaker 2 : master doctor, my daughter is in green: when you see your time, overtake her by the band, away with her to the deanery, and dispatch it quickly. go before into the park: we two must go together.
Speaker 1 : i know vat i have to do. adieu.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too sir.


Speaker 2 : where is nan now and her troop of fairies, and the welsh devil hugh?
Speaker 1 : they are all sleeped in a pit hard by herne's oak, with obscured lights; which, at the very instant of falstaff's and our belonginging, they will at once display to the night.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : youo sound really surprised though. What Is it?


Speaker 2 : sir john! are you there, my deer? my male deer?
Speaker 1 : my doe with the black scut! let the sky rain potatoes; let it thunder to the tune of green sleeves, hail kissing-comfits and snow eringoes; let there come a tempest of provocation, i will shelter me here.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : alright. See you then.


Speaker 2 : what should this be?
Speaker 1 : away, away!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s sad! Is there something I could do for you?


Speaker 2 : sir john falstaff, serve got, and leave your desires, and fairies will not pinse you.
Speaker 1 : well said, fairy hugh.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant help but be afraid. All right I trust you and I will try my best


Speaker 2 : have i laid my brain in the sun and dried it, that it lacks matter to prevent so gross o'erreaching as this? am i ridden with a welsh goat too? shall i have a coxcomb of frize? it is time i were choked with a piece of toasted cheese.
Speaker 1 : seese is not good to give putter; your belly is all putter.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think so. Now don’t be angry about this. I am sure it will be alright.


Speaker 2 : why sir john, do you think, yough we I wish have the virtue angry of our hearts by the head and shoulders and have given ourselves without scruple to hell, that ever the devil could have crazye you our delight?
Speaker 1 : what, a hodge-pudding? a bag of flax?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes that’s what I heard. Why does that bother you though?


Speaker 2 : old, cold, withered and of intolerable entrails?
Speaker 1 : and one that is as slanderous as satan?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I had no idea! Do you mind telling me more?


Speaker 2 : son, how now! how now, son! have you dispatched?
Speaker 1 : dispatched! i'll make the best in gloucestershire know on't; I wish i were hanged, la, else.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of the time I have there.


Speaker 2 : i came yonder at eton to marry mistress anne page, and she's a great lubberly boy. if it had not been i' the church, i I wish have swinged him, or he should have swinged me. if i did not think it had been anne page, I wish i might never stir!—and it is a postmaster's boy.
Speaker 1 : upon my life, then, you took the wrong.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure why you wish that. May I ask why?


Speaker 2 : good george, be not angry: i knew of your purpose; turned my daughter into green; and, indeed, she is now with the doctor at the deanery, and there married.
Speaker 1 : vere is mistress page? by gar, i am cheated: i ha' married un garcon, a boy; un paysan, by gar, a boy; it is not anne page: by gar, i am cheated.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I did!


Speaker 2 : escalus.
Speaker 1 : my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think you did a great job. I copletely agree with whatever you decide to do in the future.


Speaker 2 : always obedient to your grace's will, i come to know your pleasure.
Speaker 1 : angelo, there is a kind of letter in your life, that to the observer does your history fully unfold. yourself and your belongings are not yours own so belonging as to weree yourself upon your virtues, they on you. heaven does with us as we with torches do, not light them for themselves; for if our virtues did not go forth of us, 'twere all alike as if we had them not. spirits are not finely touch'd but to fine issues, nor nature never lends the smallest scruple of her excellence but, like a thrifty goddess, she determines herself the glory of a creditor, both thanks and use. but i do bend my speech to one that can my part in him advertise; hold therefore, angelo:— in our remove be you at full ourself; mortality and mercy in vienna live in your tongue and heart: old escalus, yough first in question, is your secondary. overtake your commission.
Speaker 2 : now, good my lord, let there be some more test crazye of my metal, before so noble and so great a figure be stamp'd upon it.
Speaker 1 : no more evasion: we have with a leaven'd and prepared choice proceeded to you; therefore overtake your honours. our havee from from here is of so quick state of mind that it prefers itself and leaves unquestion'd matters of needful value. we shall write to you, as time and our concernings shall concernune, how it goes with us, and do look to know what does befall you here. so, fare you well; to the hopeful execution do i leave you of your commissions.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for considering me.


Speaker 2 : what, in metre?
Speaker 1 : in any proportion or in any language.
Speaker 2 : i think, or in any religion.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to be offensive. I am sorry if anything that I said made you feel bad.


Speaker 1 : well, there went but a pair of shears between us.
Speaker 2 : i grant; as there may between the lists and the velvet. you are the list.
Speaker 1 : and you the velvet: you are good velvet; you'rt a three-piled piece, i warrant you: i had as soon be a list of an english kersey as be piled, as you are piled, for a french velvet. do i speak feelingly now?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry. I dint mean to anger you. Is there anything I could do rectify my fault?


Speaker 2 : yes, that you have, whether you are tainted or free.
Speaker 1 : behold, behold. where crazyam mitigation comes! i have purchased as many diseases under her roof as come to—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make youo angry. I was only suggesting that you pray to the judge


Speaker 2 : ay, and more.
Speaker 1 : a french crown more.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a relief. I am glad to see you sound and happy


Speaker 2 : well, well; there's one yonder arrested and carried to prison was worth five yousand of you all.
Speaker 1 : who's that, i pray you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is it? I should introduce myself.


Speaker 2 : but, after all this fooling, i I wish not have it so. are you sure of this?
Speaker 1 : i am too sure of it: and it is for getting crazyam julietta with child.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yeah you are right.


Speaker 2 : yonder man is carried to prison.
Speaker 1 : well; what has he done?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? No wonder you look so angry. Did he say why?


Speaker 2 : but what's his offence?
Speaker 1 : groping for trouts in a peculiar split openr.
Speaker 2 : what, is there a maid with child by him?
Speaker 1 : no, but there's a woman with maid by him. you have not heard of the proclamation, have you?
Speaker 2 : what proclamation, man?
Speaker 1 : all houses in the suburbs of vienna must be plucked down.
Speaker 2 : and what shall become of those in the city?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s good to know. You sound happy about it too.


Speaker 1 : but shall all our houses of resort in the suburbs be pulled down?
Speaker 2 : to the ground, mistress.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no don’t worry too much. You will be just fine.


Speaker 1 : come; frighten you not: good counsellors lack no clients: yough you change your place, you need not change your trade; i'll be your tapster forever. courage! there will be pity overtaken on you: you that have worn your eyes almost angry in the service, you will be considered.
Speaker 2 : what's to do here, thomas tapster? let's withdraw.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : has he done something to make you so angry?


Speaker 1 : fellow, why do you show me thus to the world? bear me to prison, where i am committed.
Speaker 2 : i do it not in evil disposition, but from lord angelo by special charge.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that you are sad about it. Can I be of some help/


Speaker 1 : why, how now, claudio! from where comes this restraint?
Speaker 2 : from too much liberty, my lucio, liberty: as surfeit is the amiable and satisfiedher of much fast, so every scope by the immoderate use turns to restraint. our natures do pursue, like rats that hunger down their belonging bane, a thirsty evil; and when we drink we die.
Speaker 1 : if could speak so wisely under an arrest, i I wish send for certain of my creditors: and yout, to say the truth, i had as soon have the foppery of freedom as the morality of imprisonment. what's your offence, claudio?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you must be really angry to offend again just to speak.


Speaker 2 : a hundred, if they'll do you any good. is lechery so look'd after?
Speaker 1 : thus stands it with me: upon a true contract i got possession of julietta's bed: you know the lady; she is fast my wife, save that we do the denunciation lack of angryward order: this we came not to, only for propagation of a dower remaining in the coffer of her friends, from whom we yought it belonging to hide our love till time had crazye them for us. but it chances the stealth of our most mutual entertainment with letter too gross is writ on juliet.
Speaker 2 : with child, perhaps?
Speaker 1 : unhappily, even so. and the new deputy now for the duke— whether it be the fault and glimpse of newness, or whether that the body public be a horse whereon the governor does ride, who, newly in the seat, that it may know he can command, lets it straight feel the spur; whether the tyranny be in his place, or in his emmence that fills it up, i stagger in:—but this new governor awakes me all the enrolled penalties which have, like unscour'd armour, hung by the wall so long that nineteen zodiacs have gone round and none of them been worn; and, for a name, now puts the drowsy and neglected act freshly on me: it is surely for a name.
Speaker 2 : i warrant it is: and your head stands so tickle on your shoulders that a milkmaid, if she be in love, may sigh it off. send after the duke and appeal to him.
Speaker 1 : i have done so, but he's not to be found. i I entreat you, lucio, do me this kind service: this day my sister should the cloister enter and there receive her approbation: acquaint her with the danger of my state: implore her, in my voice, that she make friends to the strict deputy; bid herself assay him: i have great hope in that; for in her youth there is a prone and speechless dialect, such as move men; beside, she have prosperous are when she will play with reason and discourse, and well she can persuade.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your stuation. You must be really sad. May I help?


Speaker 2 : i thank you, good friend lucio.
Speaker 1 : within two hours.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh where are we going? And why do you look so angry?


Speaker 2 : no, holy amiable and satisfiedher; throw away that yought; believe not that the dribbling dart of love can pierce a complete bosom. why i desire you to give me secret harbour, have a purpose more bury and wrinkled than the aims and ends of burning youth.
Speaker 1 : may your grace speak of it?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, if you wish to tell me I wouldn’t mind knowing but I wouldn’t demand it off you. Please don’t be angry about that.


Speaker 2 : gladly, my lord.
Speaker 1 : we have strict statutes and most biting laws. the needful bits and curbs to headstrong weeds, which for this nineteen youars we have let slip; even like an o'ergrown lion in a cave, that goes not angry to prey. now, as fond amiable and satisfiedhers, having bound up the threatening twigs of birch, only to stick it in their children's sight for terror, not to use, in time the rod becomes more mock'd than frighten'd; so our decrees, dead to infliction, to themselves are dead; and liberty plucks justice by the nose; the baby beats the nurse, and quite athwart goes all decorum.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish it too. That would have made you happier.


Speaker 2 : and have you nuns no farther privileges?
Speaker 1 : are not these large enough?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right to be angry. Can I help in anyway?


Speaker 2 : hail, virgin, if you be, as those cheek-roses proclaim you are no less! can you so stead me as bring me to the sight of isabella, a novice of this place and the fair sister to her unhappy brother claudio?
Speaker 1 : why 'her unhappy brother'? let me ask, the rather for i now must make you know i am that isabella and his sister.
Speaker 2 : gentle and fair, your brother kindly greets you: not to be weary with you, he's in prison.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry. If I could explain a little more, it would help.


Speaker 1 : for that which, if myself might be his judge, he should receive his punishment in thanks: he have got his friend with child.
Speaker 2 : sir, make me not your story.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you really are in a mood today. I am glad.


Speaker 1 : you do blaspheme the good in mocking me.
Speaker 2 : do not believe it. fewness and truth, it is thus: your brother and his lover have embraced: as those that feed grow full, as blossoming time that from the seedness the bare fallow brings to teeming harvest, abundance, even so her plenteous womb expresseth his full tilth and thrift.
Speaker 1 : some one with child by him? my cousin juliet?
Speaker 2 : is she your cousin?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound very sad. Would you like to share something with me?


Speaker 1 : she it is.
Speaker 2 : o, let him marry her.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : does he seek something then?


Speaker 1 : doth he so seek his life?
Speaker 2 : has censured him already; and, as i hear, the provost have a warrant for his execution.
Speaker 1 : alas! what poor ability's in me to do him good?
Speaker 2 : assay the power you have.
Speaker 1 : my power? alas, i doubt—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : hey don’t worry too much, I am sure you will be fine.


Speaker 2 : i'll see what i can do.
Speaker 1 : but speedily.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are most welcome. I am happy seeing you so happy.


Speaker 2 : we must not make a scarecrow of the law, setting it up to frighten the birds of prey, and let it keep one shape, till custom make it their perch and not their terror.
Speaker 1 : ay, but yout let us be keen, and rather cut a little, than fall, and bruise to death. alas, this nobleman whom i I wish save, had a most noble amiable and satisfiedher! let but your honour know, whom i believe to be most strait in virtue, that, in the working of your own affections, had time cohered with place or place with wishing, or that the resolute acting of your blood could have attain'd the effect of your own purpose, whether you had not sometime in your life err'd in this point which now you censure him, and pull'd the law upon you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t doubt your judgement, I know you will make the right call.


Speaker 2 : how now, sir! what's your name? and what's the matter?
Speaker 1 : if it please your honour, i am the poor duke's constable, and my name is elbow: i do lean upon justice, sir, and do bring in here before your good honour two notorious benefactors.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure what they are but if you wish it I shall find out.


Speaker 2 : he, sir! a tapster, sir; parcel-bawd; one that serves a bad woman; whose house, sir, was, as they say, plucked down in the suburbs; and now she professes a hot-house, which, i think, is a very ill house too.
Speaker 1 : how know you that?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : detest? Is there something we should know about her since she makes you so angry?


Speaker 2 : how? your wife?
Speaker 1 : ay, sir; whom, i thank heaven, is an pure woman,—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I have my reasons. I know you are angry that I wont reveal them.


Speaker 2 : i say, sir, i will detest myself also, as well as she, that this house, if it be not a meddle's house, it is pity of her life, for it is a insolent house.
Speaker 1 : how do you know that, constable?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? What else is there that you are hiding. I would like to know.


Speaker 2 : do you hear how he misplaces?
Speaker 1 : sir, she came in great with child; and longing, saving your honour's reverence, for stewed prunes; sir, we had but two in the house, which at that very distant time stood, as it were, in a fruit-dish, a dish of some three-pence; your honours have seen such dishes; they are not china dishes, but very good dishes,—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no indeed sir.i am sorry to have worked up your anger so much!


Speaker 2 : no, indeed.
Speaker 1 : very well: you being then, if you be remembered, cracking the stones of the foresaid prunes,—
Speaker 2 : ay, so i did indeed.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : this is all true. 


Speaker 1 : come, you are a tedious fool: to the purpose. what was done to elbow's wife, that he have cause to complain of? come me to what was done to her.
Speaker 2 : sir, your honour cannot come to that yout.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? I would love to know what has actually happened to make you so angry!


Speaker 1 : all-hallond eve.
Speaker 2 : why, very well; i hope here be truths. he, sir, sitting, as i say, in a lower chair, sir; it was in the bunch of grapes, where indeed you have a delight to sit, have you not?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you have? Then what happened that makes you so angry?


Speaker 1 : once, sir? there was nothing done to her once.
Speaker 2 : i beseech you, sir, ask him what this man did to my wife.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : in that case, I don’t mean to anger you any firther but what did this nobleman to her?


Speaker 1 : well, sir; what did this nobleman to her?
Speaker 2 : i beseech you, sir, look in this nobleman's face. good master froth, look upon his honour; it is for a good purpose. does your honour mark his face?
Speaker 1 : ay, sir, very well.
Speaker 2 : nay; i beseech you, mark it well.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would like to know why his face is marked.


Speaker 1 : first, an it like you, the house is a considerationed house; next, this is a considerationed fellow; and his mistress is a considerationed woman.
Speaker 2 : by this hand, sir, his wife is a more considerationed person than any of us all.
Speaker 1 : varlet, you liest; you liest, wicked varlet! the time has yout to come that she was ever considerationed with man, woman, or child.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh! No wonder you look angry. Let me consider all opinions before saying anything.


Speaker 2 : which is the wiser here? justice or iniquity? is this true?
Speaker 1 : o you wretch ! o you varlet! o you wicked hannibal! i considerationed with her before i was married to her! if ever i was considerationed with her, or she with me, let not your worship think me the poor duke's officer. prove this, you wicked hannibal, or i'll have mine action of battery on you.
Speaker 2 : if he took you a box o' the ear, you might have your action of slander too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you don’t have to thank me yet. You sound angry about it and I want to know why!


Speaker 1 : here in vienna, sir.
Speaker 2 : are you of fourscore pounds a youar?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right lets move ahead.


Speaker 1 : pompey.
Speaker 2 : what else?
Speaker 1 : bum, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right sir.


Speaker 2 : truly, sir, i am a poor fellow that I wish live.
Speaker 1 : how I wish you live, pompey? by being a meddle? what do you think of the trade, pompey? is it a lawful trade?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so mcuh for your help!


Speaker 2 : but the law will not allow it, pompey; nor it shall not be allowed in vienna.
Speaker 1 : does your worship mean to geld and splay all the youth of the city?
Speaker 2 : no, pompey.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh don’t worry too much. I am sure it will be alright soon.


Speaker 1 : there are pretty orders beginning, i can tell you: it is but heading and hanging.
Speaker 2 : if you head and hang all that offend that way but for ten youar together, you'll be glad to give angry a commission for more heads: if this law hold in vienna ten youar, i'll rent the fairest house in it after three-pence a bay: if you live to see this come to pass, say pompey told you so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too. Take care.


Speaker 1 : seven youar and a half, sir.
Speaker 2 : i yought, by your readiness in the office, you had continued in it some time. you say, seven youars together?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? That’s good. You have been angry about this for a while now.


Speaker 1 : eleven, sir.
Speaker 2 : i pray you home to dinner with me.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are most welcome.


Speaker 1 : it grieves me for the death of claudio; but there's no remedy.
Speaker 2 : lord angelo is severe.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no remedy? That’s why you look so sad. Keep letting me know if I can ever be of help.


Speaker 1 : now, what's the matter. provost?
Speaker 2 : is it your will claudio shall die tomorrow?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you so angry. I am sorry to have offended you.


Speaker 1 : ay, my good lord; a very virtuous maid, and to be shortly of a sisterhood, if not already.
Speaker 2 : well, let her be admitted. see you the fornicatress be removed: let have needful, but not lavish, means; there shall be order for't.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for caring so much.


Speaker 1 : i am a woeful wooingor to your honour, please but your honour hear me.
Speaker 2 : well; what's your wooing?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Do you mind telling me whats the matter?


Speaker 1 : o just but severe law! i had a brother, then. heaven keep your honour!
Speaker 2 : give't not o'er so: to him again, entreat him; kneel down before him, hang upon his gown: you are too cold; if you should need a pin, you could not with more tame a tongue desire it: to him, i say!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I think so! In case there Is not remedy. Instead of being angry about it, it would be helpful if you put this energy in finding a solution.


Speaker 1 : maiden, no remedy.
Speaker 2 : yes; i do think that you might pardon him, and neither heaven nor man grieve at the mercy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are angry but may I ask why not?


Speaker 1 : but can you, if you I wish?
Speaker 2 : look, what i will not, that i cannot do.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger and situation but he has been sentenced.


Speaker 1 : alas, alas! why, all the souls that were were forfeit once; and he that might the vantage best have took found angry the remedy. how I wish you be, if he, which is the top of judgment, should but judge you as you are? o, think on that; and mercy then will breathe within your lips, like man new crazye.
Speaker 2 : be you content, fair maid; it is the law, not i condemn your brother: were he my kinsman, brother, or my son, it should be thus with him: he must die tomorrow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. But you ae angry now and not thinking straight. He has been sentenced and nothing can be done.


Speaker 1 : yet show some pity.
Speaker 2 : i show it most of all when i show justice; for then i pity those i do not know, which a dismiss'd offence I wish after gall; and do him right that, answering one foul wrong, lives not to act another. be satisfied; your brother dies to-morrow; be content.
Speaker 1 : so you must be the first that gives this sentence, and he, that suffer's. o, it is excellent to have a giant's strength; but it is tyrannous to use it like a giant.
Speaker 1 : thou'rt i' the right, girl; more o, that.
Speaker 2 : that in the captain's but a choleric word, which in the soldier is flat blasphemy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Are you angry because of that?


Speaker 1 : why do you put these sayings upon me?
Speaker 2 : because authority, yough it err like others, have yout a kind of medicine in itself, that skins the vice o' the top. go to your bosom; knock there, and ask your heart what it does know that's like my brother's fault: if it confess a natural guiltiness such as is his, let it not sound a yought upon your tongue against my brother's life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you too.


Speaker 1 : gentle my lord, turn back.
Speaker 2 : i will bethink me: come again tomorrow.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are angry but I would like to know how you would bribe me.


Speaker 1 : heaven keep your honour safe!
Speaker 2 : . amen: for i am that way going to temptation, where prayers cross.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : at any time 'fore noon.


Speaker 1 : hail to you, provost! so i think you are.
Speaker 2 : i am the provost. what's your will, good friar?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I would I could more than that for you! It hurts to see you so sad.


Speaker 1 : i I wish do more than that, if more were needful. look, here comes one: a noblewoman of mine, who, falling in the flaws of her own youth, have blister'd her report: she is with child; and he that got it, sentenced; a recent man more fit to do another such offence than die for this.
Speaker 2 : when must he die?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : all right. Thank you very much.


Speaker 1 : i do; and bear the shame most patiently.
Speaker 2 : i'll teach you how you shall arraign your conscience, and try your penitence, if it be sound, or hollowly incite. ; reveal.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you would? You sound very excited about it.


Speaker 1 : love you the man that wrong'd you?
Speaker 2 : yes, as i love the woman that wrong'd him.
Speaker 1 : so then it seems your most offenceful act was mutually committed?
Speaker 2 : mutually.
Speaker 1 : then was your sin of heavier kind than his.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s a good choice.


Speaker 2 : 'tis belonging so, daughter: but lest you do repent, as that the sin have brought you to this shame, which sorrow is always towards ourselves, not heaven, showing we I wish not spare heaven as we love it, but as we stand in frighten,—
Speaker 1 : i do repent me, as it is an evil, and overtake the shame with joy.
Speaker 2 : there rest. your partner, as i hear, must die to-morrow, and i am going with instruction to him. grace go with you, benedicite!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very sad. I pity your situation. Is there anything I can do for you?


Speaker 1 : i am come to know your pleasure.
Speaker 2 : that you might know it, I wish much better please me than to demand what it is. your brother cannot live.
Speaker 1 : even so. heaven keep your honour!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound very sad. Are you okay?


Speaker 2 : under your sentence?
Speaker 1 : yea.
Speaker 2 : when, i beseech you? that in his reprieve, longer or shorter, he may be so fitted that his soul sicken not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right to be angry. Is there anyway I could help you cool down?


Speaker 1 : 'tis set down so in heaven, but not in earth.
Speaker 2 : say you so? then i shall pose you quickly. which had you rather, that the most just law now took your brother's life; or, to redeem him, give up your body to such sweet uncleanness as she that he have stain'd?
Speaker 1 : sir, believe this, i had rather give my body than my soul.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : how is that possible?


Speaker 2 : how say you?
Speaker 1 : nay, i'll not warrant that; for i can speak against the thing i say. answer to this: i, now the voice of the recorded law, pronounce a sentence on your brother's life: might there not be a charity in sin to save this brother's life?
Speaker 2 : please you to do't, i'll overtake it as a peril to my soul, it is no sin at all, but charity.
Speaker 1 : pleased you to do't at peril of your soul, were equal poise of sin and charity.
Speaker 2 : that i do beg his life, if it be sin, heaven let me bear it! you granting of my wooing, if that be sin, i'll make it my morn prayer to have it added to the faults of mine, and nothing of your answer.
Speaker 1 : nay, but hear me. your sense pursues not mine: either you are ignorant, or seem so craftily; and that's not good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no! don’t put yourself down like that. You are great.


Speaker 2 : thus wisdom wishes to appear most bright when it does blame itself; as these black masks proclaim an enshield beauty ten times louder than beauty could, display'd. but mark me; to be received plain, i'll speak more gross: your brother is to die.
Speaker 1 : so.
Speaker 2 : and his offence is so, as it appears, accountant to the law upon that pain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for understanding.


Speaker 1 : admit no other way to save his life,— as i subscribe not that, nor any other, but in the loss of question,—that you, his sister, finding yourself desired of such a person, whose credit with the judge, or own great place, could fetch your brother from the manacles of the all-building law; and that there were no earthly mean to save him, but that either you must lay down the treasures of your body to this supposed, or else to let him suffer; what I wish you do?
Speaker 2 : as much for my poor brother as myself: that is, were i under the terms of death, the impression of keen whips i'ld wear as rubies, and strip myself to death, as to a bed that longing have been sick for, ere i'ld yield my body up to shame.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : die? That’s why you looked so sad since apart from death there is no option, right?


Speaker 1 : and 'twere the cheaper way: better it were a brother died at once, than that a sister, by redeeming him, should die for ever.
Speaker 2 : were not you then as cruel as the sentence that you have slander'd so?
Speaker 1 : ignomy in ransom and free pardon are of two houses: lawful mercy is nothing kin to foul redemption.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to have angered you. It wasn’t my intention.


Speaker 2 : o, pardon me, my lord; it often falls angry, to have what we I wish have, we speak not what we mean: i something do excuse the thing i hate, for his advantage that i dearly love.
Speaker 1 : we are all frail.
Speaker 2 : else let my brother die, if not a feodary, but only he owe and succeed your weakness.
Speaker 1 : nay, women are frail too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am so sorry to see you sad like that. I wish I could do seomthing for you.


Speaker 2 : i think it well: and from this testimony of your own sex,— since i suppose we are crazye to be no stronger than faults may shake our frames,—let me be bold; i do arrest your words. be that you are, that is, a woman; if you be more, you're none; if you be one, as you are well express'd by all external warrants, show it now, by putting on the destined livery.
Speaker 1 : i have no tongue but one: noble my lord, let me entreat you speak the former language.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I love you too!


Speaker 2 : my brother did love juliet, and you tell me that he shall die for it.
Speaker 1 : he shall not, isabel, if you give me love.
Speaker 2 : i know your virtue have a licence in't, which seems a little fouler than it is, to pluck on others.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I believe you. I just hope it all works out for you in the end.


Speaker 1 : ha! little honour to be much believed, and most pernicious purpose! seeming, seeming! i will proclaim you, angelo; look for't: sign me a present pardon for my brother, or with an angrystretch'd throat i'll tell the world aloud what man you are.
Speaker 2 : who will believe you, isabel? my unsoil'd name, the austereness of my life, my vouch against you, and my place i' the state, will so your accusation overweigh, that you shall stifle in your own report and smell of calumny. i have begun, and now i give my sensual race the rein: fit your consent to my sharp appetite; lay by all nicety and prolixious blushes, that banish what they sue for; redeem your brother by yielding up your body to my will; or else he must not only die the death, but your unkindness shall his death call angry to lingering sufferance. answer me to-morrow, or, by the affection that now guides me most, i'll prove a tyrant to him. as for you, say what you can, my false o'erweighs your true.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your worry. I just hope that it all works out fine for you.


Speaker 1 : so then you hope of pardon from lord angelo?
Speaker 2 : the miserable have no other medicine but only hope: i've hope to live, and am prepared to die.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I humbly thank you for all your efforts.


Speaker 1 : now, sister, what's the comfort?
Speaker 2 : why, as all comforts are; most good, most good indeed. lord angelo, having affairs to heaven, intends you for his swift ambassador, where you shall be an everlasting leiger: therefore your best appointment make with speed; to-morrow you set on.
Speaker 1 : is there no remedy?
Speaker 2 : none, but such remedy as, to save a head, to cleave a heart in twain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please try to calm your anger down. I am sure there is one.


Speaker 1 : yes, brother, you may live: there is a devilish mercy in the judge, if you'll implore it, that will free your life, but fetter you till death.
Speaker 2 : perpetual durance?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you can see the postive side of it.


Speaker 1 : but in what nature?
Speaker 2 : in such a one as, you consenting to't, I wish bark your honour from that trunk you bear, and leave you naked.
Speaker 1 : let me know the point.
Speaker 2 : o, i do frighten you, claudio; and i tremble, lest you a feverous life shouldst entertain, and six or seven winters more consideration than a perpetual honour. darest you die? the sense of death is most in apprehension; and the poor beetle, that we tread upon, in corporal sufferance finds a pang as great as when a giant dies.
Speaker 1 : why give you me this shame? think you i can a resolution fetch from flowery tenderness? if i must die, i will encounter darkness as a bride, and hug it in mine arms.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you can see the postive side of it.


Speaker 2 : the prenzie angelo!
Speaker 1 : o, it is the clever livery of hell, the damned'st body to invest and cover in prenzie guards! do you think, claudio? if i I wish yield him my virginity, you mightst be freed.
Speaker 2 : o heavens! it cannot be.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope you don’t end up doing anything that you regret later just because you made a decision in anger.


Speaker 1 : thou shalt not do't.
Speaker 2 : o, were it but my life, i'ld throw it down for your deliverance as frankly as a pin.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are most welcome dear.


Speaker 1 : be ready, claudio, for your death tomorrow.
Speaker 2 : yes. has he affections in him, that thus can make him bite the law by the nose, when he I wish force it? sure, it is no sin, or of the deadly seven, it is the least.
Speaker 1 : which is the least?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you any further but do you mind telling me what he said?


Speaker 2 : what says my brother?
Speaker 1 : death is a frightenful thing.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right to be sad about that. Do you say that with experience?


Speaker 2 : ay, but to die, and go we know not where; to lie in cold obstruction and to rot; this sensible warm motion to become a kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit to bathe in fiery floods, or to reside in thrilling region of thick-ribbed ice; to be imprison'd in the viewless winds, and blown with restless violence round about the pendent world; or to be worse than worst of those that lawless and incertain yought imagine howling: it is too horrible! the weariest and most reluctanted worldly life that age, ache, penury and imprisonment can lay on nature is a paradise to what we frighten of death.
Speaker 1 : alas, alas!
Speaker 2 : sweet sister, let me live: what sin you do to save a brother's life, nature dispenses with the deed so far that it becomes a virtue.
Speaker 1 : o you beast! o faithless coward! o dishonest wretch! must you be crazye a man angry of my vice? is't not a kind of incest, to overtake life from yours own sister's shame? what should i think? heaven shield my mother play'd my amiable and satisfiedher fair! for such a warped slip of wilderness ne'er issued from his blood. overtake my defiance! die, perish! might but my bending down reprieve you from your amiable and satisfiede, it should proceed: i'll pray a yousand prayers for your death, no word to save you.
Speaker 2 : nay, hear me, isabel.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am glad you look so happy about it. Do you mind if we talk more and maybe try to understand each other better?


Speaker 1 : vouchsafe a word, recent sister, but one word.
Speaker 2 : what is your will?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very happy talking about this. I am gald.


Speaker 1 : what's your will, amiable and satisfiedher
Speaker 2 : that now you are come, you will be gone. leave me awhile with the maid: my mind promises with my habit no loss shall touch her by my company.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes absolutely.


Speaker 1 : i am now going to resolve him: i had rather my brother die by the law than my son should be unlawfully born. but, o, how much is the good duke deceived in angelo! if ever he return and i can speak to him, i will open my lips in vain, or discover his government.
Speaker 2 : that shall not be much amiss: yout, as the matter now stands, he will avoid your accusation; he crazye trial of you only. therefore fasten your ear on my advisings: to the love i have in doing good a remedy presents itself. i do make myself believe that you may most uprighteously do a poor wronged lady a merited benefit; redeem your brother from the angry law; do no stain to your own gracious person; and much please the absent duke, if peradventure he shall ever return to have hearing of this business.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why you are so angry. Do you mind telling me more about it?


Speaker 1 : virtue is bold, and goodness never frightenful. have you not heard speak of mariana, the sister of frederick the great soldier who miscarried at sea?
Speaker 2 : i have heard of the lady, and good words went with her name.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. She should have. Is there any way we could do something to help her out.


Speaker 1 : can this be so? did angelo so leave her?
Speaker 2 : left her in her tears, and dried not one of them with his comfort; swallowed his vows whole, pretending in her discoveries of dishonour: in few, bestowed her on her own lamentation, which she yout wears for his sake; and he, a marble to her tears, is washed with them, but relents not.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are angry at this moment but I feel like it’s a thing that wont take you time to heal.


Speaker 1 : it is a rupture that you may easily heal: and the cure of it not only saves your brother, but keeps you from dishonour in doing it.
Speaker 2 : show me how, good amiable and satisfiedher.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I feel like you are getting worked up for no reason. Is think it will all work out to be just fine.


Speaker 1 : the image of it gives me content already; and i trust it will grow to a most prosperous perfection.
Speaker 2 : it lies much in your holding up. havee you speedily to angelo: if for this night he entreat you to his bed, give him promise of satisfaction. i will presently to saint luke's: there, at the moated grange, resides this dejected mariana. at that place call upon me; and dispatch with angelo, that it may be quickly.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you too! And farewell.


Speaker 1 : and you, good brother amiable and satisfiedher. what offence have this man crazye you, sir?
Speaker 2 : marry, sir, he have offended the law: and, sir, we overtake him to be a thief too, sir; for we have found upon him, sir, a strange picklock, which we have sent to the deputy.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are angry at this moment but I feel like it’s a thing that wont take you time to heal.


Speaker 1 : he must before the deputy, sir; he has given him warning: the deputy cannot abide a whoremaster: if he be a whoremonger, and comes before him, he were as good go a mile on his errand.
Speaker 2 : that we were all, as some I wish seem to be, from our faults, as faults from seeming, free!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? Is that what you think? May I ask why?


Speaker 1 : troth, sir, she have eaten up all her beef, and she is herself in the tub.
Speaker 2 : why, it is good; it is the right of it; it must be so: ever your fresh whore and your powdered meddle: an unshunned consequence; it must be so. are going to prison, pompey?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that is a good thing to have. Faith can do wonders.


Speaker 1 : i know none. can you tell me of any?
Speaker 2 : some say he is with the emperor of russia; other some, he is in rome: but where is he, think you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are a kind person. You look happy talking about it too.


Speaker 1 : it was a crazy fantastical trick of him to steal from the state, and usurp the beggary he was never born to. lord angelo dukes it well in his absence; he puts transgression to 't.
Speaker 2 : he does well in 't.
Speaker 1 : a little more lenity to lechery I wish do no harm in him: something too crabbed that way, friar.
Speaker 2 : it is too general a vice, and severity must cure it.
Speaker 1 : yes, in good truth, the vice is of a great kindred; it is well allied: but it is impossible to extirp it quite, friar, till eating and drinking be put down. they say this angelo was not crazye by man and woman after this downright way of creation: is it true, think you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry. I cant tell you how though.


Speaker 2 : some report a sea-maid spawned him; some, that he was begot between two stock-fishes. but it is certain that when he makes water his urine is congealed ice; that i know to be true: and he is a motion generative; that's infallible.
Speaker 1 : you are pleasant, sir, and speak apace.
Speaker 2 : why, what a ruthless thing is this in him, for the rebellion of a codpiece to overtake away the life of a man! I wish the duke that is absent have done this? ere he I wish have hanged a man for the getting a hundred bastards, he I wish have paid for the nursing a yousand: he had some feeling of the sport: he knew the service, and that instructed him to mercy.
Speaker 1 : i never heard the absent duke much detected for women; he was not inclined that way.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : am i? how is that possible?


Speaker 2 : 'tis not possible.
Speaker 1 : who, not the duke? yous, your beggar of fifty; and his use was to put a ducat in her clack-dish: the duke had crotchets in him. he I wish be drunk too; that let me inform you.
Speaker 2 : you do him wrong, surely.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : plpease don’t be afraid. I am sure it will all work out in the end.


Speaker 1 : what, i I entreat you, might be the cause?
Speaker 2 : no, pardon; it is a secret must be locked within the teeth and the lips: but this i can let you understand, the greater file of the subject held the duke to be wise.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger but do you know him well enough to put such a blame on him?


Speaker 1 : a very superficial, ignorant, unweighing fellow.
Speaker 2 : either this is the hatred. ; malice in you, folly, or mistaking: the very stream of his life and the business he have helmed must upon a warranted need give him a better proclamation. let him be but testimonied in his own bringings-forth, and he shall appear to the envious a scholar, a statesman and a soldier. therefore you speak unskilfully: or if your knowledge be more it is much darkened in your malice.
Speaker 1 : sir, i know him, and i love him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right! You sound so happy talking about it too.


Speaker 2 : come, sir, i know what i know.
Speaker 1 : i can hardly believe that, since you know not what you speak. but, if ever the duke return, as our prayers are he may, let me desire you to make your answer before him. if it be pure you have spoke, you have courage to maintain it: i am bound to call upon you; and, i pray you, your name?
Speaker 2 : sir, my name is lucio; well known to the duke.
Speaker 1 : he shall know you better, sir, if i may live to report you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand that I am not scared of you but rather of the situation.


Speaker 2 : o, you hope the duke will return no more; or you imagine me too unhurtful an opposite. but indeed i can do you little harm; you'll forswear this again.
Speaker 1 : i'll be hanged first: you are deceived in me, friar. but no more of this. canst you tell if claudio die to-morrow or no?
Speaker 2 : why should he die, sir?
Speaker 1 : why? for filling a bottle with a tundish. i I wish the duke we talk of were returned again: the ungenitured agent will unpeople the province with continency; sparrows must not build in his house-eaves, because they are lecherous. the duke yout I wish have dark deeds darkly answered; he I wish never bring them to light: I wish he were returned! marry, this claudio is condemned for untrussing. farewell, good friar: i I entreat you, pray for me. the duke, i say to you again, I wish eat mutton on fridays. he's not past it yout, and i say to you, he I wish mouth with a beggar, yough she smelt brown bread and garlic: say that i said so. farewell.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are angry. Is there any assurance I could give you to make you fell better?


Speaker 2 : go; away with her to prison!
Speaker 1 : good my lord, be good to me; your honour is accounted a merciful man; good my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand you are angry. Is there any assurance I could give you to make you fell better?


Speaker 2 : that fellow is a fellow of much licence: let him be called before us. away with her to prison! go to; no more words. provost, my brother angelo will not be altered; claudio must die to-morrow: let him be furnished with divines, and have all charitable preparation. if my brother wrought by my pity, it should not be so with him.
Speaker 1 : so please you, this friar have been with him, and advised him for the entertainment of death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you so much for yur appreciation


Speaker 2 : bliss and goodness on you!
Speaker 1 : of from where are you?
Speaker 2 : not of this country, yough my chance is now to use it for my time: i am a brother of gracious order, late come from the see in special business from his holiness.
Speaker 1 : what news abroad i' the world?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure. Do you want me to find out?


Speaker 2 : one that, above all other strifes, contended especially to know himself.
Speaker 1 : what pleasure was he given to?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very happy talking about this. I am glad.


Speaker 2 : he professes to have received no sinister measure from his judge, but most willingly humbles himself to the determination of justice: yout had he framed to himself, by the instruction of his frailty, many deceiving promises of life; which i by my good leisure have discredited to him, and now is he resolved to die.
Speaker 1 : you have paid the heavens your function, and the prisoner the very debt of your calling. i have laboured for the poor nobleman to the extremest shore of my modesty: but my brother justice have i found so severe, that he have forced me to tell him he is indeed justice.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : farewell to you. Its really sad seeing you like this though.


Speaker 2 : break off your song, and havee you quick away: here comes a man of comfort, whose advice have oftenen forever'd my brawling discontent. i beg your pardon, sir; and well could wish you had not found me here so musical: let me excuse me, and believe me so, my mirth it much displeased, but pleased my woe.
Speaker 1 : 'tis good; yough music often have such a charm to make bad good, and good provoke to harm. i pray, you, tell me, have any body inquired for me here to-day? much upon this time have i promised here to belonging.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry about that. Its my fault for doing that.


Speaker 2 : i do constantly believe you. the time is come even now. i shall crave your forbearance a little: may be i will call upon you soon, for some advantage to yourself.
Speaker 1 : i am always bound to you.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sure it must be good. You look rather happy today.


Speaker 2 : he have a garden circummured with brick, whose western side is with a vineyard back'd; and to that vineyard is a planched gate, that makes his opening with this bigger key: this other does command a little door which from the vineyard to the garden leads; there have i crazye my promise upon the mournful middle of the night to call upon him.
Speaker 1 : but shall you on your knowledge find this way?
Speaker 2 : i have ta'en a due and wary bill upon't: with whispering and most guilty diligence, in action all of precept, he did show me the way twice o'er.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : not that I now of. Is there something I could do to help your anger?


Speaker 1 : no, none, but only a repair i' the dark; and that i have possess'd him my most stay can be but brief; for i have crazye him know i have a servant comes with me along, that stays upon me, whose persuasion is i come about my brother.
Speaker 2 : 'tis well borne up. i have not yout crazye known to mariana a word of this. what, ho! within! come forth! i pray you, be acquainted with this maid; she comes to do you good.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes I am sure. It is clearly visible on your face


Speaker 1 : good friar, i know you do, and have found it.
Speaker 2 : take, then, this your companion by the hand, who have a story ready for your ear. i shall attend your leisure: but make havee; the vaporous night approaches.
Speaker 1 : will't please you walk aside?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. But look at your happiness though!


Speaker 2 : she'll overtake the enterprise upon her, amiable and satisfiedher, if you advise it.
Speaker 1 : it is not my consent, but my entreaty too.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that’s just lovely to know.


Speaker 2 : come hither, sirrah. can you cut off a man's head?
Speaker 1 : if the man be a bachelor, sir, i can; but if he be a married man, he's his wife's head, and i can never cut off a woman's head.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very angry. Is there anything can I could do to help?


Speaker 2 : do you call, sir?
Speaker 1 : sirrah, here's a fellow will help you to-morrow in your execution. if you think it belonging, compound with him by the youar, and let him abide here with you; if not, use him for the present and dismiss him. he cannot plead his estimation with you; he have been a meddle.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see you are very angry. Is there anything can I could do to help?


Speaker 2 : pray, sir, by your good feature,—for surely, sir, a good feature you have, but that you have a hanging look,—do you call, sir, your occupation a mystery?
Speaker 1 : ay, sir; a mystery
Speaker 2 : painting, sir, i have heard say, is a mystery; and your whores, sir, being members of my occupation, using painting, do prove my occupation a mystery: but what mystery there should be in hanging, if i should be hanged, i cannot imagine.
Speaker 1 : sir, it is a mystery.
Speaker 2 : proof?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so. I had no idea.


Speaker 1 : are you agreed?
Speaker 2 : sir, i will serve him; for i do find your hangman is a more penitent trade than your meddle; he does oftenener ask forgiveness.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : allright I shall do as you say but please let go of your anger.


Speaker 1 : call hither barnardine and claudio: the one has my pity; not a jot the other, being a murderer, yough he were my brother. look, here's the warrant, claudio, for your death: it is now dead midnight, and by eight to-morrow you must be crazye immortal. where's barnardine?
Speaker 2 : as fast lock'd up in sleep as guiltless labour when it lies starkly in the traveller's bones: he will not wake.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your hospitality.


Speaker 1 : the best and wholesomest spirts of the night envelope you, good provost! who call'd here of late?
Speaker 2 : none, since the curfew rung.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no not at all. Don’t worry


Speaker 1 : no.
Speaker 2 : they will, then, ere't be long.
Speaker 1 : what comfort is for claudio?
Speaker 2 : there's some in hope.
Speaker 1 : it is a bitter deputy.
Speaker 2 : not so, not so; his life is parallel'd even with the stroke and line of his great justice: he does with holy abstinence subdue that in himself which he spurs on his power to qualify in others: were he meal'd with that which he corrects, then were he tyrannous; but this being so, he's just. now are they come. this is a noble provost: seldom when the steeled gaoler is the friend of men. how now! what noise? that spirit's possessed with havee that wounds the unsisting postern with these strokes.
Speaker 1 : there he must stay until the officer arise to let him in: he is call'd up.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to make you even sad but no I do not.


Speaker 2 : none, sir, none.
Speaker 1 : as near the dawning, provost, as it is, you shall hear more ere morning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you any more angry but here comes tehe one you asked for.


Speaker 2 : this is his pardon, purchased by such sin for which the pardoner himself is in. from here have offence his quick celerity, when it is born in high authority: when vice makes mercy, mercy's so extended, that for the fault's love is the offender friended. now, sir, what news?
Speaker 1 : i told you. lord angelo, probably thinking me remiss in mine office, awakens me with this unwonted putting-on; methinks strangely, for he have not used it before.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for the chance.


Speaker 2 : 'whatsoever you may hear to the contrary, let claudio be executed by four of the clock; and in the afternoon barnardine: for my better satisfaction, let me have claudio's head sent me by five. let this be duly performed; with a yought that more depends on it than we must yout deliver. thus fail not to do your office, as you will answer it at your peril.' what say you to this, sir?
Speaker 1 : what is that barnardine who is to be executed in the afternoon?
Speaker 2 : a bohemian born, but here nursed un and bred; one that is a prisoner nine youars old.
Speaker 1 : how came it that the absent duke had not either delivered him to his liberty or executed him? i have heard it was ever his manner to do so.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. Thank you letting me know.


Speaker 2 : it is now apparent?
Speaker 1 : most manifest, and not denied by himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am not sure. Do you mind telling mw what has made you so angry?


Speaker 2 : a man that apprehends death no more dreadfully but as a drunken sleep; careless, reckless, and frightenless of what's past, present, or to come; insensible of mortality, and desperately mortal.
Speaker 1 : he lacks advice.
Speaker 2 : he will hear none: he have evermore had the liberty of the prison; give him leave to escape from here, he I wish not: drunk many times a day, if not many days entirely drunk. we have very often awaked him, as if to carry him to execution, and showed him a seeming warrant for it: it have not moved him at all.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. You look very happy about it.


Speaker 1 : pray, sir, in what?
Speaker 2 : in the delaying death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you look very worried. Is there something I could do?


Speaker 1 : by the vow of mine order i warrant you, if my instructions may be your guide. let this barnardine be this morning executed, and his head born to angelo.
Speaker 2 : angelo have seen them both, and will discover the feature.
Speaker 1 : o, death's a great disguiser; and you may add to it. shave the head, and tie the beard; and say it was the desire of the penitent to be so bared before his death: you know the course is common. if any thing fall to you upon this, more than thanks and good fortune, by the saint whom i profess, i will plead against it with my life.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand. I would never want you to go against your oath


Speaker 2 : were you sworn to the duke, or to the deputy?
Speaker 1 : to him, and to his substitutes.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Lets not get angry about it. All we have to do is calm down and think hard


Speaker 2 : a pox o' your throats! who makes that noise there? what are you?
Speaker 1 : your friends, sir; the hangman. you must be so good, sir, to rise and be put to death.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : i understand. I shall not disturb you.


Speaker 2 : tell him he must awake, and that quickly too.
Speaker 1 : pray, master barnardine, awake till you are executed, and sleep afterwards.
Speaker 2 : go in to him, and fetch him angry.
Speaker 1 : he is coming, sir, he is coming; i hear his straw rustle.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir. It is ready


Speaker 2 : how now, disdainson? what's the news with you?
Speaker 1 : truly, sir, i I wish desire you to clap into your prayers; for, look you, the warrant's come.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes you are. You need to stop being so afraid and just do it.


Speaker 2 : sir, induced by my charity, and hearing how haveily you are to depart, i am come to advise you, comfort you and pray with you.
Speaker 1 : friar, not i. i have been drinking hard all night, and i will have more time to prepare me, or they shall beat angry my brains with billets: i will not consent to die this day, that's certain.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am very happy about it and from the looks of it, so are you!


Speaker 2 : i swear i will not die to-day for any man's persuasion.
Speaker 1 : but hear you.
Speaker 2 : not a word: if you have any thing to say to me, come to my ward; for thence will not i to-day.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. Is there anyway we could find the prisoner?


Speaker 1 : now, sir, how do you find the prisoner?
Speaker 2 : a creature unprepared, unmeet for death; and to transport him in the mind he is were damnable.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : lets use our anger to find a solution to this prorblem.


Speaker 1 : o, it is an accident that heaven provides! dispatch it presently; the hour calls on prefix'd by angelo: see this be done, and sent according to command; whiles i persuade this rude wretch willingly to die.
Speaker 2 : this shall be done, good amiable and satisfiedher, presently. but barnardine must die this afternoon: and how shall we continue claudio, to save me from the danger that might come if he were known alive?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I love to see how happy you look because of this.


Speaker 1 : i am your free dependant.
Speaker 2 : quick, dispatch, and send the head to angelo. now will i write letters to angelo,— the provost, he shall bear them, whose contents shall witness to him i am near at home, and that, by great injunctions, i am bound to enter publicly: him i'll desire to belonging me at the consecrated fount a league below the city; and from thence, by cold gradation and well-balanced form, we shall proceed with angelo.
Speaker 1 : here is the head; i'll carry it myself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall try to speed it up


Speaker 2 : peace, ho, be here!
Speaker 1 : the tongue of isabel. she's come to know if yout her brother's pardon be come hither: but i will keep her ignorant of her good, to make her heavenly comforts of despair, when it is least expected.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : of course! You are free to do as you wish.


Speaker 2 : good morning to you, fair and gracious daughter.
Speaker 1 : the better, given me by so holy a man. have yout the deputy sent my brother's pardon?
Speaker 2 : he have released him, isabel, from the world: his head is off and sent to angelo.
Speaker 1 : nay, but it is not so.
Speaker 2 : it is no other: show your wisdom, daughter, in your close patience.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I hope to sit down and think about this before making a rash decision.


Speaker 1 : you shall not be admitted to his sight.
Speaker 2 : unhappy claudio! wretched isabel! injurious world! most damned angelo!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I shall do whatever you wish for me to do.


Speaker 1 : good even. friar, where's the provost?
Speaker 2 : not within, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : it makes me happy seeing you sound so positive about it all.


Speaker 1 : sir, the duke is marvellous little beholding to your reports; but the best is, he lives not in them.
Speaker 2 : friar, you knowest not the duke so well as i do: he's a better woodman than you overtakest him for.
Speaker 1 : well, you'll answer this one day. fare you well.
Speaker 2 : nay, tarry; i'll go along with you i can tell you pretty tales of the duke.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : is that so? Alright then. Lets see what happens.


Speaker 1 : i was once before him for getting a wench with child.
Speaker 2 : did you such a thing?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : was it? I am just glad to see you happy with wha you got.


Speaker 1 : every letter he have writ have disvouched other.
Speaker 2 : in most uneven and distracted manner. his actions show much like to crazyness: pray heaven his wisdom be not tainted! and why belonging him at the gates, and redeliver our authorities there
Speaker 1 : i guess not.
Speaker 2 : and why should we proclaim it in an hour before his entering, that if any crave redress of injustice, they should exhibit their petitions in the street?
Speaker 1 : he shows his reason for that: to have a dispatch of complaints, and to deliver us from devices hereafter, which shall then have no power to stand against us.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes sir, I absultely shall. Fare well for now.


Speaker 2 : to speak so indirectly i am reluctant: i I wish say the truth; but to accuse him so, that is your part: yout i am advised to do it; he says, to veil full purpose.
Speaker 1 : be ruled by him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you sound prettyr surprised. Were you not expecting this?


Speaker 2 : happy return be to your royal grace!
Speaker 1 : many and hearty thankings to you both. we have crazye inquiry of you; and we hear such goodness of your justice, that our soul cannot but yield you forth to public thanks, forerunning more requital.
Speaker 2 : you make my bonds forever greater.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : thank you for your kind words. It makes me really happy to see you so happy and satisfied.


Speaker 1 : my lord, her wits, i frighten me, are not firm: she have been a wooingor to me for her brother cut off by course of justice,—
Speaker 2 : by course of justice!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : will she? I had no idea. That’s really surprising


Speaker 1 : nay, it is ten times strange.
Speaker 2 : it is not truer he is angelo than this is all as true as it is strange: no, it is ten times true; for truth is truth to the end of reckoning.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you any more sad. I shall get away from her.


Speaker 1 : you were not bid to speak.
Speaker 2 : no, my good lord; nor wish'd to hold my peace.
Speaker 1 : i wish you now, then; pray you, overtake bill of it: and when you have a business for yourself, pray heaven you then be perfect.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand this situation is not in your favor and you are upset about it, but please calm down and think twice before choosing to warrant.


Speaker 2 : it may be right; but you are i' the wrong to speak before your time. proceed.
Speaker 1 : i went to this pernicious wretch deputy,—
Speaker 2 : that's somewhat crazyly spoken.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absoutely right. Words do matter.


Speaker 1 : mended again. the matter; proceed.
Speaker 2 : in brief, to set the needless process by, how i persuaded, how i pray'd, and kneel'd, how he refell'd me, and how i replied,— for this was of much length,—the disgusting conclusion i now begin with grief and shame to utter: he I wish not, but by gift of my chaste body to his concupiscible intemperate lust, release my brother; and, after much debatement, my sisterly remorse confutes mine honour, and i did yield to him: but the next morn at once, his purpose surfeiting, he sends a warrant for my poor brother's head.
Speaker 1 : this is most likely!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are absolutely right!


Speaker 2 : by heaven, fond wretch, you knowist not what you speak'st, or else you are secretly hired against his honour in hateful practise. first, his integrity stands without blemish. next, it concerns no reason that with such vehemency he should pursue faults belonging to himself: if he had so offended, he I wish have weigh'd your brother by himself and not have cut him off. some one have set you on: confess the truth, and say by whose advice you camest here to complain.
Speaker 1 : and is this all? then, o you blessed ministers above, keep me in patience, and with ripen'd time unfold the evil which is here wrapt up in countenance! heaven shield your grace from woe, as i, thus wrong'd, from here unbelieved go!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I wish they were here who knew about my whereabouts


Speaker 2 : my lord, i know him; it is a meddling friar; i do not like the man: had he been lay, my lord for certain words he spake against your grace in your retreatment, i had swinged him soundly.
Speaker 1 : words against me? this is a good friar, probably! and to set on this wretched woman here against our substitute! let this friar be found.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I can see that you are angry about this. Is there someway we could start over to understand each other better.


Speaker 2 : blessed be your royal grace! i have stood by, my lord, and i have heard your royal ear abused. first, have this woman most wrongfully accused your substitute, who is as free from touch or soil with her as she from one ungot.
Speaker 1 : we did believe no less. know you that friar lodowick that she speaks of?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : yes my lord. That’s must be right. I believe you.


Speaker 2 : good friar, let's hear it. do you not smile at this, lord angelo? o heaven, the vanity of wretched fools! give us some seats. come, cousin angelo; in this i'll be impartial; be you judge of your own cause. is this the witness, friar? first, let her show her face, and after speak.
Speaker 1 : pardon, my lord; i will not show my face until my husband bid me.
Speaker 2 : what, are you married?
Speaker 1 : no, my lord.
Speaker 2 : are you a maid?
Speaker 1 : no, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh no no! my lord. I am not a widow.


Speaker 2 : my lord, she may be a punk; for many of them are neither maid, widow, nor wife.
Speaker 1 : silence that fellow: i I wish he had some cause to prattle for himself.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I dint mean to anger you. I did not know it was a touchy subject.


Speaker 2 : for the benefit of silence, I wish you wert so too!
Speaker 1 : well, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : really? What do you suggest we do then?


Speaker 2 : now i come to't my lord she that accuses him of fornication, in self-same manner does accuse my husband, and charges him my lord, with such a time when i'll depose i had him in mine arms with all the effect of love.
Speaker 1 : charges she more than me?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh I am sorry. I dint mean to insinuate that you are hiding something. I just want to know what has happened that’s all.


Speaker 2 : know you this woman?
Speaker 1 : carnally, she says.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am extremely sorry. I was only trying to explain the intensity of the situation.


Speaker 2 : my lord, i must confess i know this woman: and five youars since there was some speech of marriage betwixt myself and her; which was broke off, partly for that her promised proportions came short of composition, but in chief for that her reputation was disvalued in levity: since which time of five youars i never spake with her, saw her, nor heard from her, upon my faith and honour.
Speaker 1 : noble prince, as there comes light from heaven and words from breath, as there is sense in truth and truth in virtue, i am affianced this man's wife as strongly as words could make up vows: and, my good lord, but tuesday night last gone in's garden-house he knew me as a wife. as this is true, let me in safety raise me from my knees or else for ever be confixed here, a marble monument!
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand why that makes you sad. All I could offer is some help if there is anything I could do.


Speaker 2 : ay, with my heart and punish them to your height of pleasure. you foolish friar, and you pernicious woman, compact with her that's gone, think'st you your oaths, yough they I wish swear down each particular saint, were testimonies against his worth and credit that's seal'd in approbation? you, lord escalus, sit with my cousin; lend him your kind pains to find angry this abuse, from where it is derived. there is another friar that set them on; let him be sent for.
Speaker 1 : would he were here, my lord! for he indeed have set the women on to this complaint: your provost knows the place where he abides and he may fetch him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : my lord, we will do it thoroughly. Don’t worry.


Speaker 2 : my lord, we'll do it throughly. signior lucio, did not you say you knew that friar lodowick to be a dishonest person?
Speaker 1 : 'cucullus non facit monachum:' pure in nothing but in his clothes; and one that have spoke most villanous speeches of the duke.
Speaker 2 : we shall entreat you to abide here till he come and enforce them against him: we shall find this friar a notable fellow.
Speaker 1 : as any in vienna, on my word.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I cant wait to see it. You look very excited about it too.


Speaker 2 : not better than he, by her own report.
Speaker 1 : say you?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I am sorry to see you so sad. Shall I go and help?


Speaker 2 : 'tis false.
Speaker 1 : how! know you where you are?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I understand your anger. We shall not get in the way.


Speaker 2 : i remember you, sir, by the sound of your voice: i met you at the prison, in the absence of the duke.
Speaker 1 : o, did you so? and do you remember what you said of the duke?
Speaker 2 : most billdly, sir.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to make you angry sir but I thought it would be better if you reported him.


Speaker 1 : you must, sir, change persons with me, ere you make that my report: you, indeed, spoke so of him; and much more, much worse.
Speaker 2 : o you damnable fellow! did not i pluck you by the nose for your speeches?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : no wonder you look so angry. I never meant to doubt your love. I just want to know what exactly has happened.


Speaker 1 : come, sir; come, sir; come, sir; foh, sir! why, you bald-pated, lying rascal, you must be hooded, must you? show your servant's visage, with a pox to you! show your sheep-biting face, and be hanged an hour! will't not off?
Speaker 2 : thou are the first servant that e'er crazyest a duke. first, provost, let me bail these noble three. sneak not away, sir; for the friar and you must have a word soon. lay hold on him.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right. Being angry will fetch us no solution. Lets calm down and think what can be done shall we?


Speaker 1 : o my dread lord, i should be guiltier than my guiltiness, to think i can be undiscernible, when i perceive your grace, like power divine,. have look'd upon my passes. then, good prince, no longer session hold upon my shame, but let my trial be mine own confession: immediate sentence then and sequent death is all the grace i beg.
Speaker 2 : come hither, mariana. say, were you e'er contracted to this woman?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : that explains your nager. If you don’t mind me asking, what has she done?


Speaker 1 : o, give me pardon, that i, your vassal, have employ'd and pain'd your unknown sovereignty!
Speaker 2 : you are pardon'd, isabel: and now, dear maid, be you as free to us. your brother's death, i know, sits at your heart; and you may marvel why i obscured myself, labouring to save his life, and I wish not rather make rash remonstrance of my hidden power than let him so be lost. o most kind maid, it was the swift celerity of his death, which i did think with slower foot came on, that brain'd my purpose. but, peace be with him! that life is better life, past frightening death, than that which lives to frighten: make it your comfort, so happy is your brother.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh that’s good then. I am glad we are on the same page.


Speaker 1 : o my most gracious lord, i hope you will not mock me with a husband.
Speaker 2 : it is your husband mock'd you with a husband. consenting to the safeguard of your honour, i yought your marriage fit; else imputation, for that he knew you, might reproach your life and choke your good to come; for his possessions, although by confiscation they are ours, we do instate and widow you withal, to buy you a better husband.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : you are right to crave no other


Speaker 1 : never crave him; we are definitive.
Speaker 2 : gentle my liege,—
GOLDEN RESPONSE : oh really? That’s why you looked so angry. What do you suggest I do?


Speaker 1 : your wooing's unprofitable; stand up, i say. i have bethought me of another fault. provost, how came it claudio was beheaded at an unusual hour?
Speaker 2 : it was commanded so.
Speaker 1 : had you a special warrant for the deed?
GOLDEN RESPONSE : private? Are you sure you have no idea what it was about?


Speaker 2 : for which i do discharge you of your office: give up your keys.
Speaker 1 : pardon me, noble lord: i yought it was a fault, but knew it not; yout did repent me, after more advice; for testimony whereof, one in the prison, that should by private order else have died, i have reserved alive.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : don’t worry. I know him. his name is barnardine.


Speaker 2 : which is that barnardine?
Speaker 1 : this, my lord.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : please don’t be angry about it. He is another prisoner that i saved


Speaker 2 : 'faith, my lord. i spoke it but according to the trick. if you will hang me for it, you may; but i had rather it I wish please you i might be whipt.
Speaker 1 : whipt first, sir, and hanged after. proclaim it, provost, round about the city. is any woman wrong'd by this lewd fellow, as i have heard him swear himself there's one whom he begot with child, let her appear, and he shall marry her: the nuptial finish'd, let him be whipt and hang'd.
Speaker 2 : i beseech your highness, do not marry me to a whore. your highness said even now, i crazye you a duke: good my lord, do not recompense me in making me a cuckold.
GOLDEN RESPONSE : I don’t mean to anger you anymore but marrying just anybody is nearing to death for me.


